ttle: Facebook
@: https://www.cancer.gov/publications/dictionaries/cancer-terms/def/claus-model
txt: 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Leukemia—Health Professional Version - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/leukemia/hp
txt:  Adult Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Treatment  Acute Myeloid Leukemia Treatment  Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Treatment  Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia Treatment  Hairy Cell Leukemia Treatment  Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Treatment  Childhood Acute Myeloid Leukemia Treatment  Childhood Myeloid Proliferations Associated With Down Syndrome Treatment  Childhood Myelodysplastic Neoplasms Treatment  Juvenile Myelomonocytic Leukemia Treatment  Childhood Chronic Myeloid Leukemia Treatment  Childhood APL Treatment   Childhood Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation (PDQ®)  Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer (PDQ®)  Drugs Approved for Leukemia  Find NCI-Supported Clinical Trials  NCI does not have PDQ evidence-based information about prevention of leukemia.  Cancer Prevention Overview (PDQ®)   RUNX1-familial Platelet Disorder  DDX41-Associated Myeloid Malignancies  CEBPA-associated Familial AML  Childhood Cancer Genomics  NCI does not have PDQ evidence-based information about screening for leukemia.  Cancer Screening Overview (PDQ®)  We offer evidence-based supportive and palliative care information
     for health professionals on the assessment and management of cancer-related symptoms and conditions.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Ramucirumab - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/ramucirumab
txt: Ramucirumab works by blocking a protein called VEGFR-2, which some cancer cells produce in large amounts. Blocking VEGFR-2 may prevent the growth of new blood vessels that tumors need to grow. Ramucirumab is a type of targeted therapy drug called an angiogenesis inhibitor. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Ramucirumab
         is approved 
         to be used alone or with other drugs to treat:  Colorectal cancer that has metastasized. It is used with FOLFIRI in patients whose disease has gotten worse during or after treatment with bevacizumab, oxaliplatin, and a fluoropyrimidine. Hepatocellular carcinoma (a type of liver cancer). It is used alone in patients who have a high level of alpha-fetoprotein in the blood and have been treated with  sorafenib tosylate. Non-small cell lung cancer that has metastasized. It is used:With erlotinib hydrochloride as first-line therapy in patients whose disease has certain mutations in the EGFR gene.With docetaxel in patients whose disease has gotten worse during or after treatment with platinum chemotherapy. For  patients whose disease has a mutation in the EGFR gene or  ALK gene, ramucirumab is used if their disease has gotten worse after treatment with FDA-approved therapy for these mutations. Stomach adenocarcinoma or gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinoma (a rare type of esophageal cancer) that is advanced or has metastasized (spread to other parts of the body). It is used in patients whose disease has gotten worse after treatment with a fluoropyrimidine or platinum chemotherapy. It is used alone or with paclitaxel. With erlotinib hydrochloride as first-line therapy in patients whose disease has certain mutations in the EGFR gene. With docetaxel in patients whose disease has gotten worse during or after treatment with platinum chemotherapy. For  patients whose disease has a mutation in the EGFR gene or  ALK gene, ramucirumab is used if their disease has gotten worse after treatment with FDA-approved therapy for these mutations. Ramucirumab
         is also being studied in the treatment of other types of
         cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Ramucirumab - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Targeted Therapy to Treat Cancer Monoclonal Antibodies Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors Angiogenesis Inhibitors Find Clinical Trials for Ramucirumab - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Childhood Undifferentiated Embryonal Sarcoma of the Liver - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/liver/childhood-liver-cancer/undifferentiated-embryonal-sarcoma
txt: Childhood undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver is a rare cancer type that usually forms in the tissues of the right lobe of the liver. This type of liver cancer usually occurs in children between 5 and 10 years but can also occur in adolescence. It often spreads throughout the liver and/or to the lungs. The liver is one of the largest organs in the body. It has two lobes and fills the upper right side of the abdomen inside the rib cage. Three of the many important functions of the liver include the following: to make bile to help digest fats from food to store glycogen (sugar), which the body uses for energy to filter harmful substances from the blood so they can be passed from the body in stools and urine  Symptoms of childhood undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver  Tests to diagnose childhood undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver  Getting a second opinion  Prognostic factors for childhood undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver  Stages of childhood undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver  Types of treatment for childhood undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver  Side effects and late effects of treatment  Follow-up care  Coping with your child's cancer  Children may not have symptoms of undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver until the tumor has grown bigger. It's important to check with your child's doctor if your child has any symptoms below: a lump in the abdomen abdominal pain weight loss for no known reason loss of appetite fatigue or loss of energy These symptoms may be caused by conditions other than undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver. The only way to know is to see your child's doctor. If your child has symptoms that suggest undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver, their doctor will need to find out if these are due to cancer or to another condition. The doctor will ask you when the symptoms started and how often your child has been having them. They will also ask about your child's personal and family medical history and do a physical exam. Based on these results, the doctor may recommend diagnostic tests to find out if your child has undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver. If your child has liver cancer, the results of these tests will also help you and your child's doctor plan treatment. The following tests and procedures may be used to diagnose undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver: A sample of blood is drawn and checked for the following: the number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets the amount of hemoglobin (the protein that carries oxygen) in the red blood cells the portion of the blood sample made up of red blood cells Liver function tests measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by the liver. A higher-than-normal amount of a substance can be a sign of liver damage or cancer. Blood chemistry studies measure the amounts of certain substances, such as bilirubin or lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. MRI uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to take a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the liver. A substance called gadolinium is injected into a vein. The gadolinium collects around the cancer cells so they show up brighter in the picture. The procedure is also called nuclear MRI. A CT scan uses a computer linked to an x-ray machine to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles.  A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. In childhood liver cancer, a CT scan of the chest and abdomen is usually done. To learn more, see Computed Tomography (CT) Scans and Cancer. An ultrasound exam is a procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. In childhood liver cancer, an ultrasound exam of the abdomen to check the large blood vessels is usually done. A chest x-ray is an x-ray of the lungs. An x-ray is a type of high-energy radiation that can go through the body onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. Biopsy is a procedure in which a sample of tissue is removed from the tumor so that a pathologist can view it under a microscope to check for signs of cancer. The doctor may remove as much tumor as safely possible during the same biopsy procedure. Immunohistochemistry uses antibodies to check for certain antigens (markers) in a sample of a patient's tissue. The antibodies are usually linked to an enzyme or a fluorescent dye. After the antibodies bind to a specific antigen in the tissue sample, the enzyme or dye is activated, and the antigen can then be seen under a microscope. This type of test is used to help diagnose cancer and to help tell one type of cancer from another type of cancer. You may want to get a second opinion to confirm your child's diagnosis and treatment plan. If you seek a second opinion, you will need to get important medical test results and reports from the first doctor to share with the second doctor. The second doctor will review the pathology report, slides, and scans. They may agree with the first doctor, suggest changes or another approach, or provide more information about your child's cancer. To learn more about choosing a doctor and getting a second opinion, see Finding Cancer Care. You can contact NCI's Cancer Information Service via chat, email, or phone (both in English and Spanish) for help finding a doctor or hospital that can provide a second opinion. For questions you might want to ask at your appointments, see Questions to Ask Your Doctor. If your child has been diagnosed with undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver, you may have questions about how serious the cancer is and your child's chances of survival. The likely outcome or course of a disease is called prognosis. The prognosis depends on the following: the size of the tumor how the cancer responds to chemotherapy whether the cancer can be removed completely by surgery whether your child can have a liver transplant whether the cancer has spread to other places in the body, such as the lungs whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has come back after treatment For childhood undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver that comes back after initial treatment, the prognosis depends on the following: where in the body the tumor came back the type of treatment used to treat the initial cancer No two people are alike, and responses to treatment can vary greatly. Your child's cancer care team is in the best position to talk with you about your child's prognosis. Cancer stage describes the extent of cancer in the body, such as the size of the tumor, whether it has spread, and how far it has spread from where it first formed. There is no staging system used for childhood undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver, but the tests and procedures done to diagnose the cancer are also used to help plan treatment. There are different types of treatment for children and adolescents with undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver. You and your child's care team will work together to decide treatment. Many factors will be considered, such as your child's overall health and whether the cancer is newly diagnosed or has come back. A pediatric oncologist, a doctor who specializes in treating children with cancer, will oversee treatment. The pediatric oncologist works with other healthcare providers who are experts in treating children with undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver and who specialize in certain areas of medicine. It is especially important to have a pediatric surgeon with experience in liver surgery who can send patients to a liver transplant program if needed. This may include the following specialists and others: pediatrician radiation oncologist pathologist pediatric nurse specialist rehabilitation specialist psychologist social worker nutritionist child-life specialist Your child's treatment plan will include information about the cancer, the goals of treatment, treatment options, and the possible side effects. It will be helpful to talk with your child's care team before treatment begins about what to expect. For help every step of the way, see our downloadable booklet, Children with Cancer: A Guide for Parents. When possible, the cancer is removed by surgery. The following types of surgery may be done: Partial hepatectomy removes the part of the liver where cancer is found by surgery. The part removed may be a wedge of tissue, an entire lobe, or a larger part of the liver, along with some of the healthy tissue around it. The remaining liver tissue takes over the functions of the liver and may regrow. Liver transplant is the removal of the entire liver  by surgery,  followed by a transplant of a healthy liver from a donor. A liver transplant may be done when the cancer is in the liver only, and a donated liver can be found. If the patient has to wait for a donated liver, other treatment is given as needed. Chemotherapy (also called chemo) uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. For childhood undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver, the chemotherapy is injected into a vein. When given this way, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy drugs used to treat undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver in children are: cisplatin cyclophosphamide dactinomycin doxorubicin etoposide ifosfamide vincristine Combinations of these drugs may be used. Other chemotherapy drugs not listed here may also be used. To learn more about chemotherapy and its side effects, see Chemotherapy to Treat Cancer. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. Because cancer in children is rare, taking part in a clinical trial should be considered. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. To learn more, see Clinical Trials Information for Patients and Caregivers. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances to block the action of specific enzymes, proteins, or other molecules involved in the growth and spread of cancer cells. Targeted therapy is being studied for the treatment of undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver that has come back after treatment. To learn more about how targeted therapy works against cancer, what to expect when having targeted therapy, and targeted therapy side effects, see Targeted Therapy to Treat Cancer. Treatment of newly diagnosed childhood undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver may include the following: Chemotherapy may be given before surgery  to help shrink the tumor so that it can be more easily removed. Chemotherapy may also be given after surgery. Surgery may be done to remove the tumor, followed by chemotherapy. A second surgery may be done to remove tumor that remains, followed by more chemotherapy. Liver transplant may be done if surgery to remove the tumor is not possible. Sometimes childhood undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver continues to grow or recur (comes back) after treatment. The cancer may come back in the liver or in other parts of the body. Your doctor will work with you to plan treatment if your child is diagnosed with recurrent undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver. For information about side effects that begin during treatment for cancer, see our Side Effects page. Problems from cancer treatment that begin 6 months or later  after treatment and continue for months or years are called late effects. Late effects of cancer treatment may include the following: physical problems changes in mood, feelings, thinking, learning, or memory second cancers (new types of cancer) Some late effects may be treated or controlled. It is important to talk with your child's doctors about the long-term effects cancer treatment can have on your child. To learn more, see Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. As your child goes through treatment, they will have follow-up tests or checkups. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the treatment group may be repeated to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your child's condition has changed, or if the cancer has come back. When a child has cancer, every member of the family needs support. Taking care of yourself during this difficult time is important. Reach out to your child's treatment team and to people in your family and community for support. To learn more, see Support for Families When a Child Has Cancer and the booklet Children with Cancer: A Guide for Parents.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Topotecan Hydrochloride - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/topotecanhydrochloride
txt: Topotecan hydrochloride is a chemotherapy drug that damages the DNA of cancer cells and other rapidly growing  cells, causing them to die. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Topotecan hydrochloride is approved to be used alone or with other drugs to treat: Cervical cancer that is metastatic, has recurred (come back), or cannot be cured with other therapy. It is used with cisplatin. Ovarian cancer that is metastatic.  It is used alone in patients whose cancer got worse during or after  other chemotherapy. Small cell lung cancer that is platinum sensitive.  It is used alone in patients whose cancer  got worse after first-line chemotherapy. Topotecan hydrochloride is also being studied in the treatment of other types of cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Topotecan Hydrochloride - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Topotecan–Berzosertib Combination Shows Promise against Small Cell Lung Cancer Find Clinical Trials for Topotecan Hydrochloride - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NCI-CONNECT Clinic - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/rare-brain-spine-tumor/refer-participate/referrals/clinic
txt: You are not alone in your journey with a rare brain or spine tumor. The NCI-CONNECT Clinic brings together adults with the same rare brain or spine tumor and their caregivers to receive special services. The NCI-CONNECT Clinic is located at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland and led by the NCI Center for Cancer Research’s Neuro-Oncology Branch (NOB). Patients at the NIH Clinical Center consent to participate in research studies (protocols) and are treated without charge. NIH does not bill for any services. Patients also receive support for travel expenses, food, lodging and outpatient treatment. First visit services include: A review of your diagnosis. Our team will evaluate your tumor tissue prior to your first visit to confirm your tumor type. We will also look for gene changes that could cause cancer and help us treat it.  Consultations with our expert health care team. These involve:
	Group meetings with a health and wellness expert. You will learn coping and wellness techniques and meet others with your same diagnosis.
A personalized meeting with a genetic counselor to determine if you or your family are at risk for developing cancer.
A meeting with our expert health care team to answer questions about your diagnosis and discuss treatment and clinical trial options.  Group meetings with a health and wellness expert. You will learn coping and wellness techniques and meet others with your same diagnosis.  A personalized meeting with a genetic counselor to determine if you or your family are at risk for developing cancer.  A meeting with our expert health care team to answer questions about your diagnosis and discuss treatment and clinical trial options.  View or download the NCI-CONNECT Clinic flyer > To participate in the NCI-CONNECT Clinic, have your doctor contact us at NCINOBReferrals@mail.nih.gov or call 1-866-251-9686 or 240-760-6010 (Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. ET) to discuss the best options for your care. Please understand that we are not accepting self-referrals or international patients at this time, but your care remains our top priority. What to Expect NCI neuropathologist Dr. Kenneth Aldape is using the latest technologies to precisely diagnose rare brain and spine tumors. He shares his techniques and why they’re important to precision medicine. A precise cancer diagnosis allows doctors to determine the best treatment for you. It also helps predict your prognosis, which is the likely outcome of your disease and your chance of recovery. In preparation for your first NCI-CONNECT Clinic visit, your case will be reviewed by a neuropathologist—a doctor who examines brain and spine tumor tissue to make a pre¬cise diagnosis. Our neuropathologist will: Review the pathology of the tumor to learn more about the size, shape, and appearance.  Consult with other clinical specialists to discuss the imaging and clinical features of the tumor.  Perform special genetic-molecular analysis to better classify the tumor. This may include gene-panel sequencing and DNA methylation testing.  Our team asks for tumor tissue in the form of a tissue block or unstained slides from the hospital where you had surgery. If you have not had surgery or a biopsy, our NCI-CONNECT health care team may consult with NIH’s neurosurgical oncology team. A precise diagnosis enables doctors to personalize your care. The pathology results will be discussed with you during your consultation with our health care team. After your visit, your records from your NCI-CONNECT Clinic visit will be shared with your doctor at home. NCI-CONNECT Clinic: Pathology Review Our expert health care team meets with you to help you understand your diagnosis, discuss possible treatment options, and follow-up plans. During your NCI-CONNECT Clinic visits, you will have a personalized meeting with a nurse practitioner and a neuro-oncologist. Our health care team specializes in treating rare brain and spine tumors and will work together with your doctor at home to ensure you get the best care. Our health care team will: Evaluate your history, tests, MRIs, blood work, and pathology results  Meet with you to talk about your medical history  Discuss your pathology results with you  Select the best treatment or care plan for you  Meet with you to discuss your treatment or care plan, which may include clinical trial options  Answer any questions you may have  Share and discuss your test results and care plan with your doctor at home  Healthcare Team Meeting with Patients Coping with a rare brain or spine tumor may make you feel isolated and unsure of how to stay healthy. This can also affect your loved ones. Our health and wellness counselor can help by teaching you ways to improve your health and well-being through our CARES (Coping, Advocacy, Relationships, Education, Support) group. Participants learn coping and wellness techniques and meet others with the same diagnosis, including: •    Learning techniques to improve your and your caregiver’s quality of life
•    Learning tips from others with your diagnosis
•    Getting educational resources View previous CARES group presentations > Follow us on Twitter for more coping tips @NIHBrainTumor and search for the hashtag #NCIconnect. Join our closed Facebook group, NCI-CONNECT Community, to connect with other patients and caregivers. View or download the CARES flyer > CARES Group Dr. Margarita Raygada helps patients understand what genetic testing means for their care and family cancer risk. During your NCI-CONNECT Clinic visits, you will have one or more personalized meetings with a genetic counselor. A genetic counselor helps determine if your cancer is hereditary (that is, passed down through a family) and what that means for you. While very few CNS cancers are hereditary, all are caused by genetic changes. Studying these changes helps researchers understand why brain and spine tumors occur in certain people. It also helps researchers develop treatments and improve care. Our genetic counselor will: Meet with you to talk about your personal and family medical history  Decide if genetic testing is right for you. Genetic testing involves reviewing your saliva, blood, and tumor tissue samples to look for genetic changes to find out if your tumor is hereditary  Discuss your genetic test results and how the results affect your and your family’s medical care  Answer any questions you may have  View or download the genetic counseling flyer > What is Genetic Counseling?
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Christopher M. Hartshorn, Program Director - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/nano/about/contact/hartshorn-christopher
txt:  Dr. Christopher M. Hartshorn has served as an NCI Program Director since 2014 in NCI's Alliance for Nanotechnology in Cancer and the Cancer Imaging Program. In this role, he manages research projects, evaluates the effectiveness of the Alliance programs, and maintains the proper stewardship over federally funded research across the program portfolio. Further, he performs oversight and technical guidance as well as subsequent development and direction of new research initiatives for multiple other biomedical science and technology funding initiatives across the NIH. These include other synergistic efforts to enable the future of ambulatory monitoring for remote, patient-specific medicine from artificial intelligence (AI) and novel diagnostics. All with a central focus for the more precise delivery of patient care and treatment through translatable tools and technology. Currently, these include the NIH Academic-Industrial Partnerships, NIH/NSF Cyber-physical Systems, Nutrition for Precision Health Common Fund program, and multiple SBIR topics. He is one of the senior leadership team for the NCI-FDA-HRSA-CMS Task Force on Cancer Diagnostic Devices for Near-patient Use.  The Task Force, under an MOU, is charged with advancing research and education focused on the development, validation, and implementation of cancer diagnostic devices for near-patient use. Also, he serves as a member of the trans-NCI AI and the NIH Common Fund’s Bridge2AI working groups. Most recently, in response to the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, he is also project manager and COR within the NIH Rapid Acceleration of Diagnostics (RADx) initiative Prior to joining the NSDB, Dr. Hartshorn worked for the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) on multiple R&D projects for biomedical applications as well as industrial collaborations. He earned his Ph.D. from Washington State University and his Bachelor of Science degree's from the University of New Mexico.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Thoracic Malignancy Steering Committee Roster - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/ccct/steering-committees/nctn/thoracic-malignancy/roster
txt: The Thoracic Malignancy Steering Committee (TMSC) addresses the design, prioritization, and evaluation of concepts for phase 2, 2/3, and 3 clinical trials in chest malignancies. Committee activities help foster collaboration between groups and institutions engaged in conducting trials. The TMSC's membership comprises NCTN group representatives, community oncologists, Specialized Programs of Research Excellence (SPORE) representatives, biostatisticians, patient advocates, subject matter experts, and NCI staff.  David P. Carbone, M.D., Ph.D.
The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center
Columbus, OH Megan E. Daly, M.D.
UC Davis Comprehensive Cancer Center
Sacramento, CA Valerie W. Rusch, M.D., FACS 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
New York, NY  Upal Basu Roy, Ph.D., M.P.H.
Patient Advocate
Bethesda, MD Penelope Bradbury, M.B. B.Ch., M.D., FRACP
University of Toronto Princess Margaret Cancer Centre
Toronto, ON, Canada Jeffrey D. Bradley, M.D.
Emory University Winship Cancer Institute
Atlanta, GA Julie R. Brahmer, M.D.
Johns Hopkins University Sydney Kimmel Comprehensive
Cancer Center
Baltimore, MD Lauren A. Byers, M.D.
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center  
Houston, TX Maximilian Diehn, M.D., Ph.D.
Stanford University
Stanford, CA Martin J. Edelman, M.D.
Fox Chase Cancer Center
Philadelphia, PA Jhanelle E. Gray, M.D.
Moffitt Cancer Center
Tampa, FL Stephen L. Graziano, M.D.
State University of New York Upstate Medical University
Syracuse, NY Roy S. Herbst, M.D., Ph.D.
Yale University 
New Haven, CT McGarry Houghton, M.D.
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
Seattle, WA Judith M. Johnson, M.B.A.
Patient Advocate 
Saint Louis, MO Larry Kestin, M.D.
Michigan Healthcare Professionals  
Farmington Hills, MI Edward L. Korn, Ph.D.
National Cancer Institute
Rockville, MD Shakun M. Malik, M.D.
National Cancer Institute
Rockville, MD Sumithra J. Mandrekar, Ph.D.
Mayo Clinic
Rochester, MN Margaret Mooney, M.D., M.B.A.
National Cancer Institute
Rockville, MD Kurt R. Oettel, M.D., M.B.A, FACP
Gundersen Health System
La Crosse, WI Joseph Pater, M.D., FRCP
Queen's University
Kingston, ON, Canada Mary W. Redman, Ph.D.
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
Seattle, WA Amy N. Sanford, M.D.
University of South Dakota School of Medicine
Sioux Falls, SD Steven E. Schild, M.D.
Mayo Clinic College of Medicine 
Phoenix, AZ David S. Schrump, M.D.
National Cancer Institute
Rockville, MD Lecia Sequist, M.D.
Massachusetts General Hospital
Boston, MA Thomas E. Stinchcombe, M.D.
Duke University School of Medicine
Durham, NC Mehrdad Mohseni, M.D.mehrdad.mohseni@nih.gov 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: RAS Initiative - Collaborations - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/key-initiatives/ras/about/collaborations
txt: Among the RAS Initiative’s key objectives is to serve as a central hub to the RAS community as we work towards solving one of the most pernicious problems in cancer biology. To reach that goal, the Initiative has galvanized cooperative efforts across industry, government, academic, and other research institutions, leading to a deeper understanding of RAS biology and accelerating the pace of drug discovery. Largescale collaborations with the following institutions are yielding new insights and advancing our understanding of RAS behavior and signaling. Department of Energy Pilot Program
The Department of Energy (DOE) maintains vast computational power as part of its own national missions. The DOE’s Molecular Level Pilot Program and the RAS Initiative are cooperating to apply the DOE’s unique capabilities to better model and understand how individual RAS molecules behave at the membrane in living cells. An agreement was recently signed to continue this longstanding collaboration for an additional five years. Pancreatic Cancer Action Network
Pancreatic cancer is almost exclusively driven by mutations in RAS genes. The Pancreatic Cancer Action Network (PanCan) advocates for patients and organizes fundraising efforts. PanCan coordinated with the RAS Initiative to fund postdoctoral awards and fellowships engaged in RAS research. DARPA Big Mechanism Program
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) established the Big Mechanism program, with the aim of using machine learning to read scientific literature, extract information, and develop causal, explanatory relationships. The RAS Initiative cooperated with the Big Mechanism Program to try to understand and reveal new ways to look at the RAS signaling network. Cooperative Research and Development Agreements (CRADAs) and other research agreements with the following organizations are making substantive progress towards developing novel RAS-targeted therapeutics. Beatson Institute, “Beatson Institute/FNLCR Development of RAS fragments”  Biogen-Idec, “Screening and Pilot Production of Recombinant Proteins for Early Discovery”  Daiichi-Sankyo, “KRAS-CRAF Protein-Protein Interaction Inhibitor Screen”  Eli Lilly and Company, “Characterize and compare wild type and oncogenic KRAS complexes to better understand the dynamics and mechanisms of oncogenic signaling”  Eli Lilly and Company, “Drug and tool compound discovery using phenotypic assays”  Eli Lilly and Company, “Dynamics of Ras complexes in plasma membranes”  Evotec (Sanofi), “Targeting the G13D Mutant of KRAS-Fragment Hit Identification and Hit-to-Lead Activities”  Genomic Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation, “Screen two compound libraries to identify potential inhibitors of RAS signaling”  KyRas, “Kyras/FNLCR RAS‐RAF inhibitor characterization”  Northeastern University, “Structural Characterization of RAS/Calmodumin”  Pharma Arava, “Pharma Arava/FNLCR Screen for RAS Inhibitors”  Progenra, “Development of novel KRAS degraders for cancer therapy”  Sanofi, “Sanofi/FNLCR Screen for RAS Inhibitors”  Sanofi-Aventis, “Targeting KRAS interaction with RAF1 Kinase – Hit Identification and Hit-to-Lead Activities”  TheRas, Inc., “Development and characterization of KRAS targeting compounds”  TOSK, “TOSK/FNLCR Screens for RAS inhibitors”  University of Maryland Baltimore, “Characterization of KRAS-4b hypervariable region protein interactions and targeted small molecules using NMR”  University of California at San Francisco, “Development and modification of DOCK”  University of California at San Francisco, “Identification of small molecules that bind to KRAS4b-GDP with an extended Switch 1 domain”  University of California at San Francisco, “RAS Biology Reagent, Cell Line, and Assay Development and Validation”  Weizmann Institute, “Identification of small molecules that bind or modulate KRAS4b using in silico docking”  Infixion Bioscience, Inc., “Characterization of Novel NF1 Monoclonal Antibodies”  St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, “Exploiting RAS flexibility through room temperature crystallography and molecular docking for ligand discovery”  Center for the Advancement of Science in Space, Inc. (CASIS), Purpose “To crystalize KRAS proteins in the micro-gravity environment of the International Space Station to reveal the structure of the tail and determine its interaction with a novel drug compound previously developed at the FNLCR in collaboration with the University of California, San Francisco, and TheRas”  National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS), Purpose “To identify one or more tool compounds that modulate the interaction of mutant KRAS4b with RAF through direct binding, thus disrupting RAF activation”  40 years of research into fundamental RAS biology has laid the foundation for recent advancements in the field. Academic collaborations with the following scientists are continuing this momentum in our efforts to understand and ultimately conquer this difficult oncogene Channing Der, University of North Carolina  Steve Sligar, University of Illinois  Pau Castel, New York University Grossman School of Medicine  Pablo Rodriguez-Viciana, University College London  Luca Fornelli, University of Oklahoma  Ronald Quinn, Griffith University  Corina Anastasaki, Washington University of St. Louis  Anne Carpenter, BROAD Institute  Cyril Benes, Massachusetts General Hospital  Marco Biancucci, Northwestern University - Chicago  Arul Chinnaiyan, University of Michigan  Geoffrey Clark, University of Louisville  Sandra Gabelli, Johns Hopkins  Michael Gross, Washington University  Jay Groves, University of California - Berkeley  Paul Henderson, University of California – Davis  John Hunter, University of Texas – Southwestern  Esmaiel Jabbari, University of South Carolina  Hans Robert Kalbitzer, University of Regensburg – Germany  Perry Kennedy, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute  Krishna Kota and Rajini Mudhasani, United States Army Medical Research Institute for Infectious Diseases  Nir London, Weizmann Institute  Carla Mattos, Northeastern University 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Cancer Drugs - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs
txt: Use the A to Z list below to find consumer-friendly information about drugs for cancer and conditions related to cancer. The list is in alphabetical order by generic name and brand name. You can also find this information on our pages organized by cancer type and cancer-related condition: This page lists and links to NCI's pages of drugs approved for specific types of cancer in adults and children. This page lists and links to NCI's pages of drugs approved for specific types of cancer in children. People with cancer may have conditions caused by the cancer or its treatment. Find drugs approved for some of these cancer-related conditions. A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z  Get email updates from NCI on cancer health information, news, and other topics Get email updates from NCI Abecma (Idecabtagene Vicleucel)  Abemaciclib  Abiraterone Acetate  Abraxane (Paclitaxel Albumin-stabilized Nanoparticle Formulation)  ABVD  ABVE  ABVE-PC  AC  Acalabrutinib  AC-T  Actemra (Tocilizumab)  Adagrasib  Adcetris (Brentuximab Vedotin)  ADE  Ado-Trastuzumab Emtansine  Adriamycin (Doxorubicin Hydrochloride)  Adstiladrin (Nadofaragene Firadenovec-vncg)  Afatinib Dimaleate  Afinitor (Everolimus)  Akeega (Niraparib Tosylate Monohydrate and Abiraterone Acetate)  Akynzeo (Netupitant and Palonosetron Hydrochloride)  Aldara (Imiquimod)  Aldesleukin  Alecensa (Alectinib)  Alectinib  Alemtuzumab  Alimta (Pemetrexed Disodium)  Alkeran for Injection (Melphalan Hydrochloride)  Alkeran Tablets (Melphalan)  Aloxi (Palonosetron Hydrochloride)  Alpelisib  Alunbrig (Brigatinib)  Alymsys (Bevacizumab)  Ameluz (Aminolevulinic Acid Hydrochloride)  Amifostine  Aminolevulinic Acid Hydrochloride  Amivantamab-vmjw  Anastrozole  Apalutamide  Aprepitant  Aranesp (Darbepoetin Alfa)  Aredia (Pamidronate Disodium)  Arimidex (Anastrozole)  Aromasin (Exemestane)  Arranon (Nelarabine)  Arsenic Trioxide  Arzerra (Ofatumumab)  Asciminib Hydrochloride  Asparaginase Erwinia Chrysanthemi  Asparaginase Erwinia Chrysanthemi (Recombinant)-rywn  Asparlas (Calaspargase Pegol-mknl)  Atezolizumab  Augtyro (Repotrectinib)  Avapritinib  Avastin (Bevacizumab)  Avelumab  Axicabtagene Ciloleucel  Axitinib  Ayvakit (Avapritinib)  Azacitidine  Azedra (Iobenguane I 131)  Balversa (Erdafitinib)  Bavencio (Avelumab)  BEACOPP  Beleodaq (Belinostat)  Belinostat  Belzutifan  Bendamustine Hydrochloride  Bendeka (Bendamustine Hydrochloride)  BEP  Besponsa (Inotuzumab Ozogamicin)  Besremi (Ropeginterferon Alfa-2b-njft)  Bevacizumab  Bexarotene  Bicalutamide  BiCNU (Carmustine)  Binimetinib  Bleomycin Sulfate  Blinatumomab  Blincyto (Blinatumomab)  Bortezomib  Bosulif (Bosutinib)  Bosutinib  Braftovi (Encorafenib)  Brentuximab Vedotin  Brexucabtagene Autoleucel  Breyanzi (Lisocabtagene Maraleucel)  Brigatinib  Brukinsa (Zanubrutinib)  BuMel  Busulfan  Busulfex (Busulfan)  Cabazitaxel  Cablivi (Caplacizumab-yhdp)  Cabometyx (Cabozantinib-S-Malate)  Cabozantinib-S-Malate  CAF  Calaspargase Pegol-mknl  Calquence (Acalabrutinib)  Campath (Alemtuzumab)  Camptosar (Irinotecan Hydrochloride)  Capecitabine  Capivasertib  Caplacizumab-yhdp  Capmatinib Hydrochloride  CAPOX  Carac (Fluorouracil Topical)  Carboplatin  CARBOPLATIN-TAXOL  Carfilzomib  Carmustine  Carmustine Implant  Carvykti (Ciltacabtagene Autoleucel)  Casodex (Bicalutamide)  CEM  Cemiplimab-rwlc  Ceritinib  Cervarix (Recombinant HPV Bivalent Vaccine)  Cetuximab  CEV  Chlorambucil  CHLORAMBUCIL-PREDNISONE  CHOP  Ciltacabtagene Autoleucel  Cisplatin  Cladribine  Clofarabine  Clolar (Clofarabine)  CMF  Cobimetinib Fumarate  Columvi (Glofitamab-gxbm)  Cometriq (Cabozantinib-S-Malate)  COPDAC  Copiktra (Duvelisib)  COPP  COPP-ABV  Cosmegen (Dactinomycin)  Cotellic (Cobimetinib Fumarate)  Crizotinib  CVP  Cyclophosphamide  Cyramza (Ramucirumab)  Cytarabine  Dabrafenib Mesylate  Dacarbazine  Dacogen (Decitabine)  Dacomitinib  Dactinomycin  Danyelza (Naxitamab-gqgk)  Daratumumab  Daratumumab and Hyaluronidase-fihj  Darbepoetin Alfa  Darolutamide  Darzalex (Daratumumab)  Darzalex Faspro (Daratumumab and Hyaluronidase-fihj)  Dasatinib  Daunorubicin Hydrochloride  Daunorubicin Hydrochloride and Cytarabine Liposome  Daurismo (Glasdegib Maleate)  Decitabine  Decitabine and Cedazuridine  Defibrotide Sodium  Defitelio (Defibrotide Sodium)  Degarelix  Denileukin Diftitox  Denosumab  Dexamethasone  Dexrazoxane Hydrochloride  Dinutuximab  Docetaxel  Dostarlimab-gxly  Doxil (Doxorubicin Hydrochloride Liposome)  Doxorubicin Hydrochloride  Doxorubicin Hydrochloride Liposome  Durvalumab  Duvelisib  Eflornithine Hydrochloride  Efudex (Fluorouracil Topical)  Elacestrant Dihydrochloride  Elahere (Mirvetuximab Soravtansine-gynx)  Eligard (Leuprolide Acetate)  Elitek (Rasburicase)  Ellence (Epirubicin Hydrochloride)  Elotuzumab  Eloxatin (Oxaliplatin)  Elranatamab-bcmm  Elrexfio (Elranatamab-bcmm)  Eltrombopag Olamine  Elzonris (Tagraxofusp-erzs)  Emapalumab-lzsg  Emend (Aprepitant)  Empliciti (Elotuzumab)  Enasidenib Mesylate  Encorafenib  Enfortumab Vedotin-ejfv  Enhertu (Fam-Trastuzumab Deruxtecan-nxki)  Entrectinib  Enzalutamide  Epcoritamab-bysp  Epirubicin Hydrochloride  Epkinly (Epcoritamab-bysp)  EPOCH  Epoetin Alfa  Epogen (Epoetin Alfa)  Erbitux (Cetuximab)  Erdafitinib  Eribulin Mesylate  Erivedge (Vismodegib)  Erleada (Apalutamide)  Erlotinib Hydrochloride  Erwinaze (Asparaginase Erwinia chrysanthemi)  Ethyol (Amifostine)  Etopophos (Etoposide Phosphate)  Etoposide  Etoposide Phosphate  Everolimus  Evista (Raloxifene Hydrochloride)  Evomela (Melphalan Hydrochloride)  Exemestane  5-FU (Fluorouracil Injection)  5-FU (Fluorouracil Topical)  Fam-Trastuzumab Deruxtecan-nxki  Fareston (Toremifene)  Faslodex (Fulvestrant)  FEC  Fedratinib Hydrochloride  Femara (Letrozole)  Filgrastim  Firmagon (Degarelix)  Fludarabine Phosphate  Fluoroplex (Fluorouracil Topical)  Fluorouracil Injection  Fluorouracil Topical  Flutamide  FOLFIRI  FOLFIRI-BEVACIZUMAB  FOLFIRI-CETUXIMAB  FOLFIRINOX  FOLFOX  Folotyn (Pralatrexate)  Fostamatinib Disodium  Fotivda (Tivozanib Hydrochloride)  Fruquintinib  Fruzaqla (Fruquintinib)  Fulphila (Pegfilgrastim)  FU-LV  Fulvestrant  Futibatinib  Fyarro (Sirolimus Protein-Bound Particles)  Gamifant (Emapalumab-lzsg)  Gardasil (Recombinant HPV Quadrivalent Vaccine)  Gardasil 9 (Recombinant HPV Nonavalent Vaccine)  Gavreto (Pralsetinib)  Gazyva (Obinutuzumab)  Gefitinib  Gemcitabine Hydrochloride  GEMCITABINE-CISPLATIN  GEMCITABINE-OXALIPLATIN  Gemtuzumab Ozogamicin  Gemzar (Gemcitabine Hydrochloride)  Gilotrif (Afatinib Dimaleate)  Gilteritinib Fumarate  Glasdegib Maleate  Gleevec (Imatinib Mesylate)  Gliadel Wafer (Carmustine Implant)  Glofitamab-gxbm  Glucarpidase  Goserelin Acetate  Granisetron  Granisetron Hydrochloride  Granix (Filgrastim)  Halaven (Eribulin Mesylate)  Hemangeol (Propranolol Hydrochloride)  Hepzato (Melphalan Hydrochloride)  Herceptin Hylecta (Trastuzumab and Hyaluronidase-oysk)  Herceptin (Trastuzumab)  HPV Bivalent Vaccine, Recombinant  HPV Nonavalent Vaccine, Recombinant  HPV Quadrivalent Vaccine, Recombinant  Hycamtin (Topotecan Hydrochloride)  Hydrea (Hydroxyurea)  Hydroxyurea  Hyper-CVAD  Ibrance (Palbociclib)  Ibritumomab Tiuxetan  Ibrutinib  ICE  Iclusig (Ponatinib Hydrochloride)Idamycin PFS (Idarubicin Hydrochloride)  Idarubicin Hydrochloride  Idecabtagene Vicleucel  Idelalisib  Idhifa (Enasidenib Mesylate)  Ifex (Ifosfamide)  Ifosfamide  IL-2 (Aldesleukin)  Imatinib Mesylate  Imbruvica (Ibrutinib)  Imfinzi (Durvalumab)  Imiquimod  Imjudo (Tremelimumab-actl)  Imlygic (Talimogene Laherparepvec)  Infugem (Gemcitabine Hydrochloride)  Inlyta (Axitinib)  Inotuzumab Ozogamicin  Inqovi (Decitabine and Cedazuridine)  Inrebic (Fedratinib Hydrochloride)  Interferon Alfa-2b, Recombinant  Interleukin-2 (Aldesleukin)  Intron A (Recombinant Interferon Alfa-2b)  Iobenguane I 131  Ipilimumab  Iressa (Gefitinib)  Irinotecan Hydrochloride  Irinotecan Sucrosofate  Isatuximab-irfc  Istodax (Romidepsin)  Ivosidenib  Iwilfin (Eflornithine Hydrochloride)  Ixabepilone  Ixazomib Citrate  Ixempra (Ixabepilone)  Jakafi (Ruxolitinib Phosphate)  Jaypirca (Pirtobrutinib)  JEB  Jelmyto (Mitomycin)  Jemperli (Dostarlimab-gxly)  Jevtana (Cabazitaxel)  Kadcyla (Ado-Trastuzumab Emtansine)  Kepivance (Palifermin)  Keytruda (Pembrolizumab)  Kimmtrak (Tebentafusp-tebn)  Kisqali (Ribociclib)  Koselugo (Selumetinib Sulfate)  Krazati (Adagrasib)  Kymriah (Tisagenlecleucel)  Kyprolis (Carfilzomib)  Lanreotide Acetate  Lapatinib Ditosylate  Larotrectinib Sulfate  Lenalidomide  Lenvatinib Mesylate  Lenvima (Lenvatinib Mesylate)  Letrozole  Leucovorin Calcium  Leukeran (Chlorambucil)  Leuprolide Acetate  Levulan Kerastick (Aminolevulinic Acid Hydrochloride)  Libtayo (Cemiplimab-rwlc)  Lisocabtagene Maraleucel  Lomustine  Loncastuximab Tesirine-lpyl  Lonsurf (Trifluridine and Tipiracil Hydrochloride)  Loqtorzi (Toripalimab-tpzi)  Lorbrena (Lorlatinib)  Lorlatinib  Lumakras (Sotorasib)  Lumoxiti (Moxetumomab Pasudotox-tdfk)  Lunsumio (Mosunetuzumab-axgb)  Lupron Depot (Leuprolide Acetate)  Lurbinectedin  Luspatercept-aamt  Lutathera (Lutetium Lu 177-Dotatate)  Lutetium (Lu 177-Dotatate)  Lutetium Lu 177 Vipivotide Tetraxetan  Lynparza (Olaparib)  Lytgobi (Futibatinib)  Margenza (Margetuximab-cmkb)  Margetuximab-cmkb  Matulane (Procarbazine Hydrochloride)  Mechlorethamine Hydrochloride  Megestrol Acetate  Mekinist (Trametinib Dimethyl Sulfoxide)  Mektovi (Binimetinib)  Melphalan  Melphalan Hydrochloride  Mercaptopurine  Mesna  Mesnex (Mesna)  Methotrexate Sodium  Methylnaltrexone Bromide  Midostaurin  Mirvetuximab Soravtansine-gynx  Mitomycin  Mitoxantrone Hydrochloride  Mogamulizumab-kpkc  Momelotinib Dihydrochloride Monohydrate  Monjuvi (Tafasitamab-cxix)  MOPP  Mosunetuzumab-axgb  Moxetumomab Pasudotox-tdfk  Mozobil (Plerixafor)  MVAC  Mvasi (Bevacizumab)  Myleran (Busulfan)  Mylotarg (Gemtuzumab Ozogamicin)  Nadofaragene Firadenovec-vncg  Nanoparticle Paclitaxel (Paclitaxel Albumin-stabilized Nanoparticle Formulation)  Naxitamab-gqgk  Necitumumab  Nelarabine  Neratinib Maleate  Nerlynx (Neratinib Maleate)  Netupitant and Palonosetron Hydrochloride  Neulasta (Pegfilgrastim)  Neupogen (Filgrastim)  Nexavar (Sorafenib Tosylate)  Nilandron (Nilutamide)  Nilotinib  Nilutamide  Ninlaro (Ixazomib Citrate)  Niraparib Tosylate Monohydrate  Niraparib Tosylate Monohydrate and Abiraterone Acetate  Nirogacestat Hydrobromide  Nivestym (Filgrastim)  Nivolumab  Nivolumab and Relatlimab-rmbw  Nplate (Romiplostim)  Nubeqa (Darolutamide)  Nyvepria (Pegfilgrastim)  Obinutuzumab  Odomzo (Sonidegib)  OEPA  Ofatumumab  OFF  Ogsiveo (Nirogacestat Hydrobromide)  Ojjaara (Momelotinib Dihydrochloride Monohydrate)  Olaparib  Olutasidenib  Omacetaxine Mepesuccinate  Oncaspar (Pegaspargase)  Ondansetron Hydrochloride  Onivyde (Irinotecan Sucrosofate)  Ontak (Denileukin Diftitox)  Onureg (Azacitidine)  Opdivo (Nivolumab)  Opdualag (Nivolumab and Relatlimab-rmbw)  OPPA  Orgovyx (Relugolix)  Orserdu (Elacestrant Dihydrochloride)  Osimertinib Mesylate  Oxaliplatin  Paclitaxel  Paclitaxel Albumin-stabilized Nanoparticle Formulation  Pacritinib Citrate  PAD  Padcev (Enfortumab Vedotin-ejfv)  Palbociclib  Palifermin  Palonosetron Hydrochloride  Palonosetron Hydrochloride and Netupitant  Pamidronate Disodium  Panitumumab  Paraplatin (Carboplatin)  Pazopanib Hydrochloride  PCV  PEB  Pegaspargase  Pegfilgrastim  Pemazyre (Pemigatinib)  Pembrolizumab  Pemetrexed Disodium  Pemigatinib  Perjeta (Pertuzumab)  Pertuzumab  Pertuzumab, Trastuzumab, and Hyaluronidase-zzxf  Pexidartinib Hydrochloride  Phesgo (Pertuzumab, Trastuzumab, and Hyaluronidase-zzxf)  Piqray (Alpelisib)  Pirtobrutinib  Plerixafor  Pluvicto (Lutetium Lu 177 Vipivotide Tetraxetan)  Polatuzumab Vedotin-piiq  Polivy (Polatuzumab Vedotin-piiq)  Pomalidomide  Pomalyst (Pomalidomide)  Ponatinib Hydrochloride  Portrazza (Necitumumab)  Poteligeo (Mogamulizumab-kpkc)  Pralatrexate  Pralsetinib  Prednisone  Procarbazine Hydrochloride  Procrit (Epoetin Alfa)  Proleukin (Aldesleukin)  Prolia (Denosumab)  Promacta (Eltrombopag Olamine)  Propranolol Hydrochloride  Provenge (Sipuleucel-T)  Purinethol (Mercaptopurine)  Purixan (Mercaptopurine)  Qinlock (Ripretinib)  Quizartinib Dihydrochloride  Radium 223 Dichloride  Raloxifene Hydrochloride  Ramucirumab  Rasburicase  Ravulizumab-cwvz  Reblozyl (Luspatercept-aamt)  R-CHOP  R-CVP  Recombinant Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Bivalent Vaccine  Recombinant Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Nonavalent Vaccine  Recombinant Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Quadrivalent Vaccine  Recombinant Interferon Alfa-2b  Regorafenib  Relistor (Methylnaltrexone Bromide)  Relugolix  R-EPOCH  Repotrectinib  Retacrit (Epoetin Alfa)  Retevmo (Selpercatinib)  Retifanlimab-dlwr  Revlimid (Lenalidomide)  Rezlidhia (Olutasidenib)  Riabni (Rituximab)  Ribociclib  R-ICE  Ripretinib  Rituxan (Rituximab)  Rituxan Hycela (Rituximab and Hyaluronidase Human)  Rituximab  Rituximab and Hyaluronidase Human  Rolapitant Hydrochloride  Romidepsin  Romiplostim  Ropeginterferon Alfa-2b-njft  Rozlytrek (Entrectinib)  Rubraca (Rucaparib Camsylate)  Rucaparib Camsylate  Ruxience (Rituximab)  Ruxolitinib Phosphate  Rybrevant (Amivantamab-vmjw)  Rydapt (Midostaurin)  Rylaze (Asparaginase Erwinia Chrysanthemi [Recombinant]-rywn)  Sacituzumab Govitecan-hziy  Sancuso (Granisetron)  Sarclisa (Isatuximab-irfc)  Sclerosol Intrapleural Aerosol (Talc)  Selinexor  Selpercatinib  Selumetinib Sulfate  Scemblix (Asciminib Hydrochloride)  Siltuximab  Sipuleucel-T  Sirolimus Protein-Bound Particles  Soltamox (Tamoxifen Citrate)  Somatuline Depot (Lanreotide Acetate)  Sonidegib  Sorafenib Tosylate  Sotorasib  Sprycel (Dasatinib)  STANFORD V  Sterile Talc Powder (Talc)  Steritalc (Talc)  Stivarga (Regorafenib)  Sunitinib Malate  Sustol (Granisetron)  Sutent (Sunitinib Malate)  Sylvant (Siltuximab)  Synribo (Omacetaxine Mepesuccinate)  Tabloid (Thioguanine)  Tabrecta (Capmatinib Hydrochloride)  TAC  Tafasitamab-cxix  Tafinlar (Dabrafenib Mesylate)  Tagraxofusp-erzs  Tagrisso (Osimertinib Mesylate)  Talazoparib Tosylate  Talc  Talimogene Laherparepvec  Talquetamab-tgvs  Talvey (Talquetamab-tgvs)  Talzenna (Talazoparib Tosylate)  Tamoxifen Citrate  Tarceva (Erlotinib Hydrochloride)  Targretin (Bexarotene)  Tasigna (Nilotinib)  Tavalisse (Fostamatinib Disodium)  Taxotere (Docetaxel)  Tazemetostat Hydrobromide  Tazverik (Tazemetostat Hydrobromide)  Tebentafusp-tebn  Tecartus (Brexucabtagene Autoleucel)  Tecentriq (Atezolizumab)  Teclistamab-cqyv  Tecvayli (Teclistamab-cqyv)  Temodar (Temozolomide)  Temozolomide  Temsirolimus  Tepadina (Thiotepa)  Tepmetko (Tepotinib Hydrochloride)  Tepotinib Hydrochloride  Thalidomide  Thalomid (Thalidomide)  Thioguanine  Thiotepa  Tibsovo (Ivosidenib)  Tisagenlecleucel  Tisotumab Vedotin-tftv  Tivdak (Tisotumab Vedotin-tftv)  Tivozanib Hydrochloride  Tocilizumab  Tolak (Fluorouracil Topical)  Topotecan Hydrochloride  Toremifene  Toripalimab-tpzi  Torisel (Temsirolimus)  Totect (Dexrazoxane Hydrochloride)  TPF  Trabectedin  Trametinib Dimethyl Sulfoxide  Trastuzumab  Trastuzumab and Hyaluronidase-oysk  Treanda (Bendamustine Hydrochloride)  Tremelimumab-actl  Trexall (Methotrexate Sodium)  Trifluridine and Tipiracil Hydrochloride  Trisenox (Arsenic Trioxide)  Trodelvy (Sacituzumab Govitecan-hziy)  Truqap (Capivasertib)  Truxima (Rituximab)  Tucatinib  Tukysa (Tucatinib)  Turalio (Pexidartinib Hydrochloride)  Tykerb (Lapatinib Ditosylate)  Ultomiris (Ravulizumab-cwvz)  Undencyca (Pegfilgrastim)  Unituxin (Dinutuximab)  Uridine Triacetate  VAC  Valrubicin  Valstar (Valrubicin)  VAMP  Vandetanib  Vanflyta (Quizartinib Dihydrochloride)  Varubi (Rolapitant Hydrochloride)  Vectibix (Panitumumab)  VeIP  Velcade (Bortezomib)  Vemurafenib  Venclexta (Venetoclax)  Venetoclax  Verzenio (Abemaciclib)  Vidaza (Azacitidine)  Vinblastine Sulfate  Vincristine Sulfate  Vinorelbine Tartrate  VIP  Vismodegib  Vistogard (Uridine Triacetate)  Vitrakvi (Larotrectinib Sulfate)  Vizimpro (Dacomitinib)  Vonjo (Pacritinib Citrate)  Voraxaze (Glucarpidase)  Vorinostat  Votrient (Pazopanib Hydrochloride)  Vyxeos (Daunorubicin Hydrochloride and Cytarabine Liposome)  Welireg (Belzutifan)  Xalkori (Crizotinib)  Xatmep (Methotrexate Sodium)  Xeloda (Capecitabine)  XELIRI  XELOX  Xgeva (Denosumab)  Xofigo (Radium 223 Dichloride)  Xospata (Gilteritinib Fumarate)  Xpovio (Selinexor)  Xtandi (Enzalutamide)  Yervoy (Ipilimumab)  Yescarta (Axicabtagene Ciloleucel)  Yondelis (Trabectedin)  Yonsa (Abiraterone Acetate)  Zaltrap (Ziv-Aflibercept)  Zanubrutinib  Zarxio (Filgrastim)  Zejula (Niraparib Tosylate Monohydrate)  Zelboraf (Vemurafenib)  Zepzelca (Lurbinectedin)  Zevalin (Ibritumomab Tiuxetan)  Ziextenzo (Pegfilgrastim)  Zinecard (Dexrazoxane Hydrochloride)  Zirabev (Bevcizumab)  Ziv-Aflibercept  Zofran (Ondansetron Hydrochloride)  Zoladex (Goserelin Acetate)  Zoledronic Acid  Zolinza (Vorinostat)  Zometa (Zoledronic Acid)  Zyclara (Imiquimod)  Zydelig (Idelalisib)  Zykadia (Ceritinib)  Zynlonta (Loncastuximab Tesirine-lpyl)  Zynyz (Retifanlimab-dlwr)  Zytiga (Abiraterone Acetate) 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Cervical Cancer Treatment (PDQ®) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/cervical/hp/cervical-treatment-pdq
txt:  General Information About Cervical Cancer  Cellular Classification of Cervical Cancer  Stage Information for Cervical Cancer  Treatment Option Overview for Cervical Cancer  Treatment of In Situ Cervical Cancer  Treatment of Stage IA Cervical Cancer  Treatment of Stages IB and IIA Cervical Cancer  Treatment of Stages IIB, III, and IVA Cervical Cancer  Treatment of Stage IVB Cervical Cancer  Treatment of Recurrent Cervical Cancer  Cervical Cancer  During Pregnancy  Latest Updates to This Summary (01/22/2024)  About This PDQ Summary  Incidence and Mortality Anatomy Pathogenesis Risk FactorsHuman papillomavirus (HPV) infection Clinical Features DiagnosisHPV testing Prognostic FactorsClinical stageOther prognostic factors Follow-Up  After Treatment Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection HPV testing Clinical stage Other prognostic factors Cervical cancer is the fourth most common cancer in women worldwide, and it has the fourth highest mortality rate among cancers in women.[1]  Most cases of cervical cancer are preventable with routine screening and treatment of precancerous lesions.  As a result, most cervical cancer cases are diagnosed in women who live in regions with inadequate screening protocols. Estimated new cases and deaths from cervical (uterine cervix) cancer in the United States in 2024:[2] New cases: 13,820. Deaths: 4,360. The uterine cervix is contiguous with the uterine body,  and it acts as the opening to the body of the uterus. The uterine cervix is a cylindrical, fibrous organ that is an average of 3 to 4 cm in length.  The portio of the cervix is visible on vaginal inspection.  The opening of the cervix is termed the external os.  The os is the beginning of the endocervical canal, which forms the inner aspect of the cervix.  At the upper aspect of the endocervical canal is the internal os, a narrowing of the endocervical canal.  The narrowing marks the transition from the cervix to the uterine body.  The endocervical canal beyond the internal os is termed the endometrial canal. The cervix is lined by two types of epithelial cells: squamous cells at the outer aspect and columnar, glandular cells along the inner canal.   The transition between squamous cells and columnar cells is an area termed the squamocolumnar junction.  Most precancerous and cancerous changes arise in this zone. Cervical carcinoma begins at the squamocolumnar junction. It can involve the outer squamous cells, inner glandular cells, or both.  The precursor lesion is
dysplasia: cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) or adenocarcinoma in situ,
which can subsequently become invasive cancer.  This process can be quite slow. 
Longitudinal studies have shown that in patients with untreated in situ
cervical cancer, 30% to 70% will develop invasive carcinoma over a period of 10
to 12 years.  However, in about 10% of patients, lesions can progress from in
situ to invasive in less than  1 year.  As it becomes invasive, the
tumor breaks through the basement membrane and invades the cervical stroma. 
Extension of the tumor in the cervix may ultimately manifest as ulceration,
exophytic tumor, or extensive infiltration of underlying tissue, including
the bladder or rectum. Increasing age is the most important risk factor for most cancers. The primary risk factor for cervical cancer is human papillomavirus (HPV) infection.[3-6] Other risk factors for cervical cancer include the following: High parity and HPV infection.[7] Smoking cigarettes and HPV infection.[8] Long-term use of oral contraceptives and HPV infection.[9,10] Immunosuppression.[11,12] Having first sexual encounter at a young age.[13] High number of sexual partners.[13] Exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES) in utero.[14] HPV infection is a necessary step in the development of virtually all precancerous and cancerous lesions.  Epidemiological studies convincingly demonstrate that the major risk factor for development of preinvasive or invasive carcinoma of the cervix is HPV infection, far outweighing other known risk factors. More than 6 million
women in the United States are estimated to be infected with  HPV. Transient HPV infection is common, particularly in young women,[15] while cervical cancer is rare.  The persistence of an HPV infection leads to increased risk of developing  precancerous and cancerous lesions.[16,17] The strain of HPV infection is also important in conferring risk.  Multiple subtypes of HPV infect humans; subtypes 16 and 18 have been most closely associated with high-grade dysplasia and cancer.  Studies  suggest that acute infection with HPV types 16 and
18 conferred an 11-fold to 16.9-fold risk of rapid development of high-grade CIN.[18-20] Further studies have shown that infection with either HPV 16 or 18 is more predictive than cytological screening of high-grade CIN or greater disease, and that the predictive ability is seen for up to 18 years after the initial test.[21-23] There are two commercially available vaccines that target anogenital-related strains of HPV.  The vaccines are directed toward HPV-naïve adolescents and young adults. Although penetration of the vaccine has been moderate, significant decreases in HPV-related diseases have been documented.[24]   For more information, see Cervical Cancer Prevention. Early cervical cancer may not cause noticeable signs or symptoms. Possible signs and symptoms of cervical cancer include the following: Vaginal bleeding. Unusual vaginal discharge. Pelvic pain. Dyspareunia. Postcoital bleeding. The following procedures may be used to diagnose cervical cancer: History and physical exam. Pelvic exam. Cervical cytology (Pap smear). HPV test. Endocervical curettage. Colposcopy. Biopsy. Cervical cytology (Pap smear) has been the mainstay of cervical cancer screening since its introduction.   However, molecular techniques for the identification of HPV DNA are highly sensitive and specific.  Current screening options include the following: Cytology alone. Cytology and HPV testing. HPV testing is suggested when it is likely to successfully triage patients into low- and high-risk groups for a high-grade dysplasia or greater lesion. HPV DNA tests are unlikely to separate patients with low-grade squamous
intraepithelial lesions into those who do and those who do not need further evaluation. 
A study of 642 women found that 83% had one  or more tumorigenic HPV types
when cervical cytological specimens were assayed by a sensitive (hybrid capture)
technique.[25]  The authors of the study and an accompanying editorial
concluded that using HPV DNA testing in this setting does not add sufficient
information to justify its cost.[25] HPV DNA testing has proven
useful in triaging patients with atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance to colposcopy and has been integrated into current screening guidelines.[25-27] Other studies show that patients with low-risk cytology and high-risk HPV infection
with types 16, 18, and 31 are more likely to have CIN or microinvasive histopathology on biopsy.[18,28-30]  One
method has also shown that integration of HPV types 16 and 18 into the genome,
leading to transcription of  viral and cellular messages, may predict
patients who are at greater risk of high-grade dysplasia and invasive
cancer.[31] For women older than 30 years who are more likely to have persistent HPV infection, HPV typing can successfully triage women into high- and low-risk groups for CIN 3 or worse disease.  In this age group, HPV DNA testing is more effective than cytology alone in predicting the risk of developing CIN 3 or worse.[32]  Other studies have shown the effectiveness of a primary HPV DNA–screening strategy with cytology triage over  the previously used cytology-based screening algorithms.[33,34] The
prognosis for patients with cervical cancer is markedly affected by the extent of disease at the
time of diagnosis. More than 90% of cervical cancer cases
can be detected early by using the Pap test and HPV testing.[35] Pap and HPV testing are not performed on approximately 33% of eligible women, which results in a higher-than-expected death rate. Clinical stage as a prognostic factor is supplemented by several gross and microscopic pathological findings in surgically treated patients. Evidence (clinical stage and other findings): In a large,
surgicopathological staging study of patients with clinical stage IB disease
reported by the Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG) (GOG-49), the factors that most prominently predicted
 lymph node metastases and a decrease in disease-free
survival were capillary-lymphatic space involvement by tumor, increasing tumor
size, and increasing depth of stromal invasion, with the latter being the most
important and reproducible.[36,37] In a study of 1,028 patients treated with
radical surgery, survival rates correlated more consistently with tumor volume
(as determined by precise volumetry of the tumor) than with clinical or histological
stage.[38] A multivariate analysis of prognostic variables in 626 patients with
locally advanced disease (primarily stages II, III, and IV) studied by the GOG 
identified the following variables that were significant for progression-free interval and
survival:[39] Periaortic and pelvic lymph node status. Tumor size. Patient age. Performance status. Bilateral disease. Clinical stage. The study confirmed the overriding importance of positive periaortic
nodes and suggested further evaluation of these nodes in locally advanced
cervical cancer. The status of the pelvic nodes was important only if the
periaortic nodes were negative.  This was also true for tumor size. It is controversial whether
adenocarcinoma of the cervix carries a significantly worse prognosis than
squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix.[40]  Several population-based and retrospective studies showed a worse outcome for patients with adenocarcinoma, with an increase in distant metastasis compared with  those with squamous histology.[41-44] Reports
conflict about  the effect of adenosquamous cell type on outcome.[45,46]  One report
showed that approximately 25% of apparent squamous tumors have
demonstrable mucin production and behave more aggressively than their pure
squamous counterparts, suggesting that any adenomatous differentiation may
confer a negative prognosis.[47] In a large
series of cervical cancer patients treated by radiation therapy, the incidence
of distant metastases (most frequently to the lung, abdominal cavity, liver, and
gastrointestinal tract) was shown to increase  as the stage of disease
increased, from 3% in stage IA to 75% in stage IVA.[48]  A multivariate analysis of factors
influencing the incidence of distant metastases showed stage, endometrial
extension of tumor, and pelvic tumor control to be significant indicators of
distant dissemination.[48] GOG studies have indicated that prognostic factors vary depending on whether clinical or surgical staging is used and with different treatments. Delay in radiation delivery completion is associated with poorer progression-free survival when clinical staging is used. Stage, tumor grade, race, and age  are uncertain  prognostic factors in studies using chemoradiation.[49] Other prognostic factors that may affect outcome include the following: HIV status: Women with HIV have more aggressive and
advanced disease and a poorer prognosis.[50] C-myc overexpression: A study of patients with known
invasive squamous carcinoma of the cervix found that overexpression of the
C-myc oncogene was associated with a poorer prognosis.[51] Number of cells in S phase: The number of cells in
S phase may also have prognostic significance in early cervical carcinoma.[52] HPV-18 DNA: HPV-18 DNA is an independent adverse molecular prognostic factor. Two studies have shown a worse outcome when HPV-18 was identified in cervical cancers of patients undergoing radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy.[53,54] A polymorphism in the Gamma-glutamyl hydrolase enzyme, which is related to folate metabolism, has been shown to decrease response to cisplatin, and as a result is associated with poorer outcomes.[55] High-quality studies are lacking, and the optimal follow-up for patients after treatment for cervical cancer is unknown.  Retrospective studies have shown that cancer recurrence is most likely within the first 2 years.[56]  As a result, most guidelines suggest routine follow-up every 3 to 4 months for the first 2  years, followed by evaluations every 6 months.  Most recurrences are diagnosed secondary to new patient symptoms and signs,[57,58] and the usefulness of routine testing, including a Pap smear and chest x-ray, is unclear. Follow-up should be centered around a thorough history and physical examination with a careful review of symptoms. Imaging should be reserved for evaluation of a positive finding.   Patients should be asked about possible warning signs, including the following: Abdominal pain. Back pain. Painful or swollen leg. Problems with urination. Cough. Fatigue. The follow-up examination should also screen for possible complications of previous treatment because of  the multiple modalities (surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation) that  patients often undergo during their treatment. Sung H, Ferlay J, Siegel RL, et al.: Global Cancer Statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN Estimates of Incidence and Mortality Worldwide for 36 Cancers in 185 Countries. CA Cancer J Clin 71 (3): 209-249, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] American Cancer Society: Cancer Facts and Figures 2024. American Cancer Society, 2024. Available online. Last accessed January 17, 2024. IARC Working Group on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans: Human papillomaviruses. IARC Monogr Eval Carcinog Risks Hum  100 (Pt B), 255-313, 2012. Available online. Last accessed March 6, 2024. Schiffman M, Castle PE, Jeronimo J, et al.: Human papillomavirus and cervical cancer. Lancet 370 (9590): 890-907, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Trottier H, Franco EL: The epidemiology of genital human papillomavirus infection. Vaccine 24 (Suppl 1): S1-15, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Ault KA: Epidemiology and natural history of human papillomavirus infections in the female genital tract. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol 2006 (Suppl): 40470, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Muñoz N, Franceschi S, Bosetti C, et al.: Role of parity and human papillomavirus in cervical cancer: the IARC multicentric case-control study. Lancet 359 (9312): 1093-101, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Plummer M, Herrero R, Franceschi S, et al.: Smoking and cervical cancer: pooled analysis of the IARC multi-centric case--control study. Cancer Causes Control 14 (9): 805-14, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Moreno V, Bosch FX, Muñoz N, et al.: Effect of oral contraceptives on risk of cervical cancer in women with human papillomavirus infection: the IARC multicentric case-control study. Lancet 359 (9312): 1085-92, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Appleby P, Beral V, Berrington de González A, et al.: Cervical cancer and hormonal contraceptives: collaborative reanalysis of individual data for 16,573 women with cervical cancer and 35,509 women without cervical cancer from 24 epidemiological studies. Lancet 370 (9599): 1609-21, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Abraham AG, D'Souza G, Jing Y, et al.: Invasive cervical cancer risk among HIV-infected women: a North American multicohort collaboration prospective study. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 62 (4): 405-13, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Grulich AE, van Leeuwen MT, Falster MO, et al.: Incidence of cancers in people with HIV/AIDS compared with immunosuppressed transplant recipients: a meta-analysis. Lancet 370 (9581): 59-67, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] International Collaboration of Epidemiological Studies of Cervical Cancer: Cervical carcinoma and reproductive factors: collaborative reanalysis of individual data on 16,563 women with cervical carcinoma and 33,542 women without cervical carcinoma from 25 epidemiological studies. Int J Cancer 119 (5): 1108-24, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Hoover RN, Hyer M, Pfeiffer RM, et al.: Adverse health outcomes in women exposed in utero to diethylstilbestrol. N Engl J Med 365 (14): 1304-14, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Dunne EF, Unger ER, Sternberg M, et al.: Prevalence of HPV infection among females in the United States. JAMA 297 (8): 813-9, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Rodríguez AC, Schiffman M, Herrero R, et al.: Rapid clearance of human papillomavirus and implications for clinical focus on persistent infections. J Natl Cancer Inst 100 (7): 513-7, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Jaisamrarn U, Castellsagué X, Garland SM, et al.: Natural history of progression of HPV infection to cervical lesion or clearance: analysis of the control arm of the large, randomised PATRICIA study. PLoS One 8 (11): e79260, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Brisson J, Morin C, Fortier M, et al.: Risk factors for cervical intraepithelial neoplasia: differences between low- and high-grade lesions. Am J Epidemiol 140 (8): 700-10, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Koutsky LA, Holmes KK, Critchlow CW, et al.: A cohort study of the risk of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 2 or 3 in relation to papillomavirus infection. N Engl J Med 327 (18): 1272-8, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Schiffman MH, Bauer HM, Hoover RN, et al.: Epidemiologic evidence showing that human papillomavirus infection causes most cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. J Natl Cancer Inst 85 (12): 958-64, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Castle PE, Glass AG, Rush BB, et al.: Clinical human papillomavirus detection forecasts cervical cancer risk in women over 18 years of follow-up. J Clin Oncol 30 (25): 3044-50, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Khan MJ, Castle PE, Lorincz AT, et al.: The elevated 10-year risk of cervical precancer and cancer in women with human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 or 18 and the possible utility of type-specific HPV testing in clinical practice. J Natl Cancer Inst 97 (14): 1072-9, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Schlecht NF, Kulaga S, Robitaille J, et al.: Persistent human papillomavirus infection as a predictor of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. JAMA 286 (24): 3106-14, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Muñoz N, Kjaer SK, Sigurdsson K, et al.: Impact of human papillomavirus (HPV)-6/11/16/18 vaccine on all HPV-associated genital diseases in young women. J Natl Cancer Inst 102 (5): 325-39, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Human papillomavirus testing for triage of women with cytologic evidence of low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions: baseline data from a randomized trial. The Atypical Squamous Cells of Undetermined Significance/Low-Grade Squamous Intraepithelial Lesions Triage Study (ALTS) Group. J Natl Cancer Inst 92 (5): 397-402, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Wright TC, Massad LS, Dunton CJ, et al.: 2006 consensus guidelines for the management of women with abnormal cervical cancer screening tests. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197 (4): 346-55, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Wright TC, Massad LS, Dunton CJ, et al.: 2006 consensus guidelines for the management of women with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or adenocarcinoma in situ. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197 (4): 340-5, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Tabbara S, Saleh AD, Andersen WA, et al.: The Bethesda classification for squamous intraepithelial lesions: histologic, cytologic, and viral correlates. Obstet Gynecol 79 (3): 338-46, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Cuzick J, Terry G, Ho L, et al.: Human papillomavirus type 16 in cervical smears as predictor of high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia [corrected] Lancet 339 (8799): 959-60, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Richart RM, Wright TC: Controversies in the management of low-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. Cancer 71 (4 Suppl): 1413-21, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Klaes R, Woerner SM, Ridder R, et al.: Detection of high-risk cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and cervical cancer by amplification of transcripts derived from integrated papillomavirus oncogenes. Cancer Res 59 (24): 6132-6, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Katki HA, Kinney WK, Fetterman B, et al.: Cervical cancer risk for women undergoing concurrent testing for human papillomavirus and cervical cytology: a population-based study in routine clinical practice. Lancet Oncol 12 (7): 663-72, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Naucler P, Ryd W, Törnberg S, et al.: Efficacy of HPV DNA testing with cytology triage and/or repeat HPV DNA testing in primary cervical cancer screening. J Natl Cancer Inst 101 (2): 88-99, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Castle PE, Stoler MH, Wright TC, et al.: Performance of carcinogenic human papillomavirus (HPV) testing and HPV16 or HPV18 genotyping for cervical cancer screening of women aged 25 years and older: a subanalysis of the ATHENA study. Lancet Oncol 12 (9): 880-90, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] The 1988 Bethesda System for reporting cervical/vaginal cytological diagnoses. National Cancer Institute Workshop. JAMA 262 (7): 931-4, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Delgado G, Bundy B, Zaino R, et al.: Prospective surgical-pathological study of disease-free interval in patients with stage IB squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 38 (3): 352-7, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Zaino RJ, Ward S, Delgado G, et al.: Histopathologic predictors of the behavior of surgically treated stage IB squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. A Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Cancer 69 (7): 1750-8, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Burghardt E, Baltzer J, Tulusan AH, et al.: Results of surgical treatment of 1028 cervical cancers studied with volumetry. Cancer 70 (3): 648-55, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Stehman FB, Bundy BN, DiSaia PJ, et al.: Carcinoma of the cervix treated with radiation therapy. I. A multi-variate analysis of prognostic variables in the Gynecologic Oncology Group. Cancer 67 (11): 2776-85, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Steren A, Nguyen HN, Averette HE, et al.: Radical hysterectomy for stage IB adenocarcinoma of the cervix: the University of Miami experience. Gynecol Oncol 48 (3): 355-9, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Park JY, Kim DY, Kim JH, et al.: Outcomes after radical hysterectomy in patients with early-stage adenocarcinoma of uterine cervix. Br J Cancer 102 (12): 1692-8, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Eifel PJ, Burke TW, Morris M, et al.: Adenocarcinoma as an independent risk factor for disease recurrence in patients with stage IB cervical carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 59 (1): 38-44, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Lee YY, Choi CH, Kim TJ, et al.: A comparison of pure adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix after radical hysterectomy in stage IB-IIA. Gynecol Oncol 120 (3): 439-43, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Galic V, Herzog TJ, Lewin SN, et al.: Prognostic significance of adenocarcinoma histology in women with cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol 125 (2): 287-91, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Gallup DG, Harper RH, Stock RJ: Poor prognosis in patients with adenosquamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. Obstet Gynecol 65 (3): 416-22, 1985. [PUBMED Abstract] Yazigi R, Sandstad J, Munoz AK, et al.: Adenosquamous carcinoma of the cervix: prognosis in stage IB. Obstet Gynecol 75 (6): 1012-5, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Bethwaite P, Yeong ML, Holloway L, et al.: The prognosis of adenosquamous carcinomas of the uterine cervix. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 99 (9): 745-50, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Fagundes H, Perez CA, Grigsby PW, et al.: Distant metastases after irradiation alone in carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 24 (2): 197-204, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Monk BJ, Tian C, Rose PG, et al.: Which clinical/pathologic factors matter in the era of chemoradiation as treatment for locally advanced cervical carcinoma? Analysis of two Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG) trials. Gynecol Oncol 105 (2): 427-33, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Maiman M, Fruchter RG, Guy L, et al.: Human immunodeficiency virus infection and invasive cervical carcinoma. Cancer 71 (2): 402-6, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Bourhis J, Le MG, Barrois M, et al.: Prognostic value of c-myc proto-oncogene overexpression in early invasive carcinoma of the cervix. J Clin Oncol 8 (11): 1789-96, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Strang P, Eklund G, Stendahl U, et al.: S-phase rate as a predictor of early recurrences in carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Anticancer Res 7 (4B): 807-10, 1987 Jul-Aug. [PUBMED Abstract] Burger RA, Monk BJ, Kurosaki T, et al.: Human papillomavirus type 18: association with poor prognosis in early stage cervical cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 88 (19): 1361-8, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Lai CH, Chang CJ, Huang HJ, et al.: Role of human papillomavirus genotype in prognosis of early-stage cervical cancer undergoing primary surgery. J Clin Oncol 25 (24): 3628-34, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Silva IH, Nogueira-Silva C, Figueiredo T, et al.: The impact of GGH -401C>T polymorphism on cisplatin-based chemoradiotherapy response and survival in cervical cancer. Gene 512 (2): 247-50, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Ansink A, de Barros Lopes A, Naik R, et al.: Recurrent stage IB cervical carcinoma: evaluation of the effectiveness of routine follow up surveillance. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 103 (11): 1156-8, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Duyn A, Van Eijkeren M, Kenter G, et al.: Recurrent cervical cancer: detection and prognosis. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 81 (4): 351-5, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Morice P, Deyrolle C, Rey A, et al.: Value of routine follow-up procedures for patients with stage I/II cervical cancer treated with combined surgery-radiation therapy. Ann Oncol 15 (2): 218-23, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Squamous cell (epidermoid) carcinoma makes up approximately 90% of cervical cancers, and
adenocarcinoma makes up approximately 10% of cervical cancers.  Adenosquamous
and small cell carcinomas are relatively rare.  Primary sarcomas of the cervix
and primary and secondary malignant lymphomas of the cervix have also been reported. FIGO Stage Groupings and Definitions Carcinoma of the cervix can spread via local invasion, the
regional lymphatics, or bloodstream.  Tumor dissemination is generally a
function of the extent and invasiveness of the local lesion.  While cancer of
the cervix generally progresses in an orderly manner, occasionally a small
tumor with distant metastasis is seen.  For this reason, patients must be
carefully evaluated for metastatic disease. Pretreatment surgical staging is the most accurate method to determine the extent
of disease,[1] but  there is little evidence to demonstrate overall improved
survival with routine surgical staging; the staging is usually performed only as
part of a clinical trial.  Pretreatment surgical staging in bulky but locally
curable disease may be indicated in select cases when a nonsurgical search for
metastatic disease is negative.  If abnormal nodes are detected by computed tomography (CT) scan or
lymphangiography, fine-needle aspiration should be negative before a surgical
staging procedure is performed. Tests and procedures to evaluate the extent of the disease include the following: CT scan. Positron emission tomography scan. Cystoscopy. Laparoscopy. Chest x-ray. Ultrasonography.[2] Magnetic resonance imaging.[2] The Fédération Internationale de Gynécologie et d’Obstétrique (FIGO) and the American Joint Committee on Cancer  have designated staging to define cervical cancer; the FIGO system is most commonly used.[3,4] Gold MA, Tian C, Whitney CW, et al.: Surgical versus radiographic determination of para-aortic lymph node metastases before chemoradiation for locally advanced cervical carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group Study. Cancer 112 (9): 1954-63, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Epstein E, Testa A, Gaurilcikas A, et al.: Early-stage cervical cancer: tumor delineation by magnetic resonance imaging and ultrasound - a European multicenter trial. Gynecol Oncol 128 (3): 449-53, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Bhatla N, Aoki D, Sharma DN, et al.: Cancer of the cervix uteri: 2021 update. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 155 (Suppl 1): 28-44, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Olawaiye AB, Mutch DG, Bhosale P, et al.: Cervix uteri. In: Goodman KA, Gollub M, Eng C, et al.: AJCC Cancer Staging System. Version 9. American Joint Committee on Cancer; American College of Surgeons, 2020. Chemoradiation TherapyFluorouracil dosing Surgery and Radiation Therapy Fluorouracil dosing Patterns-of-care studies clearly demonstrate the negative prognostic effect of
increasing tumor volume and spread pattern.[1]
  Treatment, therefore,  may vary within each stage as
 the individual stages are currently defined by Fédération Internationale de Gynécologie et d’Obstétrique (FIGO). Five randomized phase III trials (GOG-85, RTOG-9001, GOG-120, GOG-123, and SWOG-8797) have shown an overall survival advantage for
cisplatin-based therapy given concurrently with radiation therapy,[2-6] while one 
trial examining this regimen demonstrated no benefit.[7] The patient
populations in these studies included women with FIGO stages IB2 to IVA
cervical cancer treated with primary radiation therapy and women with FIGO
stages I to IIA disease who were found to have poor prognostic factors (metastatic
disease in pelvic lymph nodes, parametrial disease, or positive surgical
margins) at the time of primary surgery. Although the positive trials vary in terms of the stage of disease, dose of radiation, and schedule of
cisplatin and radiation, the trials demonstrate significant survival benefit for
this combined approach.  The risk of death from cervical cancer was decreased
by 30% to 50% with the use of  concurrent chemoradiation therapy. Based on these results,  strong
consideration should be given to the incorporation of concurrent cisplatin-based chemotherapy with radiation therapy in women who require radiation
therapy for treatment of cervical cancer.[2-6] Other studies have validated these results.[8-10] The DPYD gene encodes an enzyme that catabolizes pyrimidines and fluoropyrimidines, like capecitabine and fluorouracil. An estimated 1% to 2% of the population has germline pathogenic variants in DPYD, which lead to reduced DPD protein function and an accumulation of pyrimidines and fluoropyrimidines in the body.[11,12] Patients with the DPYD*2A variant who receive fluoropyrimidines may experience severe, life-threatening toxicities that are sometimes fatal. Many other DPYD variants have been identified,  with a range of clinical effects.[11-13] Fluoropyrimidine avoidance or a dose reduction of 50% may be recommended based on  the patient's DPYD genotype and number of functioning DPYD alleles.[14-16] DPYD genetic testing costs less than $200, but insurance coverage varies due to  a lack of national guidelines.[17] In addition, testing may delay therapy by 2 weeks, which would not be advisable in urgent situations. This controversial issue requires further evaluation.[18] Surgery and radiation therapy are equally
effective for early stage, small-volume disease.[19]  Younger patients may
benefit from  surgery  to preserve the ovaries and avoid
vaginal atrophy and stenosis. Therapy for patients with cancer of the cervical stump is effective and yields 
results that are comparable with those seen in patients with an intact uterus.[20] Lanciano RM, Won M, Hanks GE: A reappraisal of the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics staging system for cervical cancer. A study of patterns of care. Cancer 69 (2): 482-7, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Whitney CW, Sause W, Bundy BN, et al.: Randomized comparison of fluorouracil plus cisplatin versus hydroxyurea as an adjunct to radiation therapy in stage IIB-IVA carcinoma of the cervix with negative para-aortic lymph nodes: a Gynecologic Oncology Group and Southwest Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 17 (5): 1339-48, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Morris M, Eifel PJ, Lu J, et al.: Pelvic radiation with concurrent chemotherapy compared with pelvic and para-aortic radiation for high-risk cervical cancer. N Engl J Med 340 (15): 1137-43, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Rose PG, Bundy BN, Watkins EB, et al.: Concurrent cisplatin-based radiotherapy and chemotherapy for locally advanced cervical cancer. N Engl J Med 340 (15): 1144-53, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Keys HM, Bundy BN, Stehman FB, et al.: Cisplatin, radiation, and adjuvant hysterectomy compared with radiation and adjuvant hysterectomy for bulky stage IB cervical carcinoma. N Engl J Med 340 (15): 1154-61, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Peters WA, Liu PY, Barrett RJ, et al.: Concurrent chemotherapy and pelvic radiation therapy compared with pelvic radiation therapy alone as adjuvant therapy after radical surgery in high-risk early-stage cancer of the cervix. J Clin Oncol 18 (8): 1606-13, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Pearcey R, Brundage M, Drouin P, et al.: Phase III trial comparing radical radiotherapy with and without cisplatin chemotherapy in patients with advanced squamous cell cancer of the cervix. J Clin Oncol 20 (4): 966-72, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Thomas GM: Improved treatment for cervical cancer--concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy. N Engl J Med 340 (15): 1198-200, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Rose PG, Bundy BN: Chemoradiation for locally advanced cervical cancer: does it help? J Clin Oncol 20 (4): 891-3, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Chemoradiotherapy for Cervical Cancer Meta-Analysis Collaboration: Reducing uncertainties about the effects of chemoradiotherapy for cervical cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of individual patient data from 18 randomized trials. J Clin Oncol 26 (35): 5802-12, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Sharma BB, Rai K, Blunt H, et al.: Pathogenic DPYD Variants and Treatment-Related Mortality in Patients Receiving Fluoropyrimidine Chemotherapy: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Oncologist 26 (12): 1008-1016, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Lam SW, Guchelaar HJ, Boven E: The role of pharmacogenetics in capecitabine efficacy and toxicity. Cancer Treat Rev 50: 9-22, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Shakeel F, Fang F, Kwon JW, et al.: Patients carrying DPYD variant alleles have increased risk of severe toxicity and related treatment modifications during fluoropyrimidine chemotherapy. Pharmacogenomics 22 (3): 145-155, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Amstutz U, Henricks LM, Offer SM, et al.: Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC) Guideline for Dihydropyrimidine Dehydrogenase Genotype and Fluoropyrimidine Dosing: 2017 Update. Clin Pharmacol Ther 103 (2): 210-216, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Henricks LM, Lunenburg CATC, de Man FM, et al.: DPYD genotype-guided dose individualisation of fluoropyrimidine therapy in patients with cancer: a prospective safety analysis. Lancet Oncol 19 (11): 1459-1467, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Lau-Min KS, Varughese LA, Nelson MN, et al.: Preemptive pharmacogenetic testing to guide chemotherapy dosing in patients with gastrointestinal malignancies: a qualitative study of barriers to implementation. BMC Cancer 22 (1): 47, 2022. [PUBMED Abstract] Brooks GA, Tapp S, Daly AT, et al.: Cost-effectiveness of DPYD Genotyping Prior to Fluoropyrimidine-based Adjuvant Chemotherapy for Colon Cancer. Clin Colorectal Cancer 21 (3): e189-e195, 2022. [PUBMED Abstract] Baker SD, Bates SE, Brooks GA, et al.: DPYD Testing: Time to Put Patient Safety First. J Clin Oncol 41 (15): 2701-2705, 2023. [PUBMED Abstract] Eifel PJ, Burke TW, Delclos L, et al.: Early stage I adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix: treatment results in patients with tumors less than or equal to 4 cm in diameter. Gynecol Oncol 41 (3): 199-205, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Kovalic JJ, Grigsby PW, Perez CA, et al.: Cervical stump carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 20 (5): 933-8, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Treatment Options for In Situ Cervical CancerConizationHysterectomy for postreproductive patientsInternal radiation therapy for medically inoperable patients Current Clinical Trials Conization Hysterectomy for postreproductive patients Internal radiation therapy for medically inoperable patients Consensus guidelines have been issued for managing women with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or adenocarcinoma in situ.[1]  Properly treated, tumor control of in situ cervical carcinoma should be nearly
100%.  Either expert colposcopic-directed biopsy or cone biopsy is required to
exclude invasive disease before therapy is undertaken.  A correlation between
cytology and colposcopic-directed biopsy is also necessary before local
ablative therapy is done.  Unrecognized invasive disease treated with
inadequate ablative therapy may be the most common cause of failure.[2] 
Failure to identify the disease, lack of correlation between the Pap smear and
colposcopic findings, adenocarcinoma in situ, or extension of disease into the
endocervical canal makes a laser, loop, or cold-knife conization mandatory. The choice of treatment  depends on the extent of disease and several patient factors, including
age, cell type, desire to preserve fertility, and medical condition. Treatment options for in situ cervical cancer include the following: Conization.Cold-knife conization (scalpel).Loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP).[3,4]Laser therapy.[5] Hysterectomy for postreproductive patients. Internal radiation therapy for medically inoperable patients. Cold-knife conization (scalpel). Loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP).[3,4] Laser therapy.[5] Hysterectomy is the standard treatment for patients with adenocarcinoma in situ.  The disease, which originates in the endocervical canal, may be more difficult to completely excise with a conization procedure.  Conization may be offered to select patients with adenocarcinoma in situ who desire future fertility. When the endocervical canal is involved, laser or cold-knife conization may be used for selected patients to preserve the uterus, avoid radiation therapy, and more extensive surgery.[6] In selected cases, the outpatient LEEP may be an acceptable alternative to cold-knife conization.  This procedure requires only local anesthesia and obviates the
risks associated with general anesthesia for cold-knife conization.[7-9] 
However, controversy exists about  the adequacy of LEEP as a replacement for
conization; LEEP is unlikely to be sufficient for patients with adenocarcinoma in situ.[10] Evidence (conization using LEEP): A trial comparing LEEP with cold-knife cone biopsy showed no
difference in the likelihood of complete excision of dysplasia.[6] Two 
case reports suggested that the use of LEEP in patients with occult invasive
cancer led to an inability to accurately determine depth of invasion when a
focus of the cancer was transected.[11] Hysterectomy is standard therapy for women with cervical adenocarcinoma in situ because of the location of the disease in the endocervical canal and the possibility of skip lesions in this region, making margin status a less reliable prognostic factor. However, the effect of hysterectomy compared with conservative surgical measures on mortality has not been studied.  Hysterectomy may be performed for squamous cell carcinoma in situ if conization is not possible because of  previous surgery, or if positive margins are noted after conization therapy.  Hysterectomy is not an acceptable front-line therapy for squamous carcinoma in situ.[12] For medically inoperable patients, a
single intracavitary insertion with tandem and ovoids for 5,000 mg hours
(80 Gy vaginal surface dose) may be used.[13] Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Wright TC, Massad LS, Dunton CJ, et al.: 2006 consensus guidelines for the management of women with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or adenocarcinoma in situ. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197 (4): 340-5, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Shumsky AG, Stuart GC, Nation J: Carcinoma of the cervix following conservative management of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. Gynecol Oncol 53 (1): 50-4, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Wright VC, Chapman W: Intraepithelial neoplasia of the lower female genital tract: etiology, investigation, and management. Semin Surg Oncol 8 (4): 180-90, 1992 Jul-Aug. [PUBMED Abstract] Bloss JD: The use of electrosurgical techniques in the management of premalignant diseases of the vulva, vagina, and cervix: an excisional rather than an ablative approach. Am J Obstet Gynecol 169 (5): 1081-5, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Tsukamoto N: Treatment of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia with the carbon dioxide laser. Gynecol Oncol 21 (3): 331-6, 1985. [PUBMED Abstract] Girardi F, Heydarfadai M, Koroschetz F, et al.: Cold-knife conization versus loop excision: histopathologic and clinical results of a randomized trial. Gynecol Oncol 55 (3 Pt 1): 368-70, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Wright TC, Gagnon S, Richart RM, et al.: Treatment of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia using the loop electrosurgical excision procedure. Obstet Gynecol 79 (2): 173-8, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Naumann RW, Bell MC, Alvarez RD, et al.: LLETZ is an acceptable alternative to diagnostic cold-knife conization. Gynecol Oncol 55 (2): 224-8, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Duesing N, Schwarz J, Choschzick M, et al.: Assessment of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) with colposcopic biopsy and efficacy of loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP). Arch Gynecol Obstet 286 (6): 1549-54, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Widrich T, Kennedy AW, Myers TM, et al.: Adenocarcinoma in situ of the uterine cervix: management and outcome. Gynecol Oncol 61 (3): 304-8, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Eddy GL, Spiegel GW, Creasman WT: Adverse effect of electrosurgical loop excision on assignment of FIGO stage in cervical cancer: report of two cases. Gynecol Oncol 55 (2): 313-7, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Massad LS: New guidelines on cervical cancer screening: more than just the end of annual Pap testing. J Low Genit Tract Dis 16 (3): 172-4, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Grigsby PW, Perez CA: Radiotherapy alone for medically inoperable carcinoma of the cervix: stage IA and carcinoma in situ. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 21 (2): 375-8, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Treatment Options for Stage IA1 Cervical CancerConizationTotal hysterectomy Treatment Options for Stage IA2 Cervical CancerModified radical hysterectomy with lymphadenectomyRadical trachelectomyIntracavitary radiation therapy Current Clinical Trials Conization Total hysterectomy Modified radical hysterectomy with lymphadenectomy Radical trachelectomy Intracavitary radiation therapy Treatment options for stage IA1 cervical cancer include the following: Conization. Total hysterectomy. If the depth of invasion is less than 3 mm, no vascular
or lymphatic channel invasion is noted, and the margins of the cone are
negative, conization alone may be appropriate in patients who wish  to preserve
fertility.[1] If the depth of invasion is  less than 3 mm, which is
 proven by cone biopsy with clear margins,[2] no vascular or lymphatic
channel invasion is noted, and the frequency of lymph-node involvement is
sufficiently low,   lymph-node dissection at the time of hysterectomy is not required. Oophorectomy is
optional and should be deferred for younger women. Treatment options for stage IA2 cervical cancer include the following: Modified radical hysterectomy with lymphadenectomy. Radical trachelectomy. Intracavitary radiation therapy. For patients with tumor invasion between 3 mm  and 5
mm, modified radical hysterectomy with pelvic-node dissection has been
recommended because of a reported risk of lymph-node metastasis of as much as
10%.[2] Radical hysterectomy with node dissection may also be
considered for patients for whom the depth of tumor invasion was uncertain because of 
invasive tumor at the cone margins. Evidence (open abdominal surgery  [open] versus minimally invasive surgery [MIS]): A multicenter, international, randomized trial, the Laparoscopic Approach to Cervical Cancer  (LACC [NCT00614211])  trial explored the efficacy of radical hysterectomy and staging via open abdominal surgery versus MIS for patients with early-stage cervical cancer.[3]   Patients with stages IA1 (with lymphovascular space invasion), IA2, and IB1 disease and histological subtypes of squamous cell, adenocarcinoma, or adenosquamous carcinoma were eligible for inclusion.  The primary end point was noninferiority of MIS compared with open surgery. The metric used was the percent of disease-free patients   at 4.5 years postsurgery.  The secondary end points were a comparison of the recurrence and survival rates between the two groups.Of the planned 740 patients, 632 were accrued when the study was stopped early because of  an imbalance in deaths between the two groups.  Of 631 eligible patients, 319 were assigned to MIS and 312 to open surgery.   The disease-free survival (DFS) rate at 4.5 years was 86% for the MIS group and 96.5% for the open group, a difference of 10.6 percentage points (95% confidence interval [CI],  -16.4 to -4.7).  At 3 years, the MIS group had a DFS rate of 91.2% versus 97.1% for the open surgery group (hazard ratio [HR] for disease recurrence or death, 3.74; 95% CI, 1.63–8.58).  The MIS group also had a lower overall survival (OS) rate at 3 years (OS, 93.8% vs. 99.0% for the open surgery group; HR for death from any cause, 6.0; 95% CI, 1.77–20.30).[3][Level of evidence A1]  The study concluded that MIS was inferior to an open abdominal approach and should not replace open surgery as the standard for patients with cervical cancer. An epidemiological study used two large U.S. databases, the National Cancer Database (NCDB) and the  Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Database, and confirmed a reduction in OS in patients undergoing MIS radical hysterectomy for stage IA2 and stage IB1 cervical cancer from 2010 to 2013.   Additionally, among women who underwent radical hysterectomy in the years 2000 to 2010, there was a decrease in OS after 2006, coincident with the widespread adoption of MIS for cervical cancer.[4][Level of evidence C1] Of the planned 740 patients, 632 were accrued when the study was stopped early because of  an imbalance in deaths between the two groups.  Of 631 eligible patients, 319 were assigned to MIS and 312 to open surgery. The disease-free survival (DFS) rate at 4.5 years was 86% for the MIS group and 96.5% for the open group, a difference of 10.6 percentage points (95% confidence interval [CI],  -16.4 to -4.7).  At 3 years, the MIS group had a DFS rate of 91.2% versus 97.1% for the open surgery group (hazard ratio [HR] for disease recurrence or death, 3.74; 95% CI, 1.63–8.58). The MIS group also had a lower overall survival (OS) rate at 3 years (OS, 93.8% vs. 99.0% for the open surgery group; HR for death from any cause, 6.0; 95% CI, 1.77–20.30).[3][Level of evidence A1] The study concluded that MIS was inferior to an open abdominal approach and should not replace open surgery as the standard for patients with cervical cancer. Although questions remain regarding the use of MIS radical hysterectomy for some subpopulations of good-risk patients, the data from this trial suggest that open abdominal surgery should be considered the standard of care for patients with early-stage cervical cancer who are candidates for  radical hysterectomy. Patients with stages IA2 to IB disease who desire future fertility may be candidates for radical trachelectomy.  In this procedure, the cervix and lateral parametrial tissues are removed, and the uterine body and ovaries are maintained.  Most centers use the following criteria for patient selection: Desire for future pregnancy. Age younger than 40 years. Presumed stage IA2 to IB1 disease and a lesion size no greater than 2 cm. Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging that shows a margin from the most distal edge of the tumor to the lower uterine segment. Squamous, adenosquamous, or adenocarcinoma cell types. Intraoperatively, the patient is assessed in a manner similar to a radical hysterectomy; the procedure is aborted if more advanced disease than expected is encountered.  The margins of the specimen are also assessed at the time of surgery, and a radical hysterectomy is performed if inadequate margins are obtained.[5-9] Intracavitary radiation therapy is a treatment option when palliative treatment is appropriate because of  other medical conditions and for women who are not surgical candidates. If the depth of invasion is less than 3
mm, no capillary lymphatic space invasion is noted, and the frequency
of lymph-node involvement is sufficiently low, external-beam radiation therapy is
not required.  One or two  insertions with tandem and ovoids for 6,500 mg to 8,000
mg hours (100–125 Gy vaginal surface dose) are recommended.[10] Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Sevin BU, Nadji M, Averette HE, et al.: Microinvasive carcinoma of the cervix. Cancer 70 (8): 2121-8, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Jones WB, Mercer GO, Lewis JL, et al.: Early invasive carcinoma of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol 51 (1): 26-32, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Ramirez PT, Frumovitz M, Pareja R, et al.: Minimally Invasive versus Abdominal Radical Hysterectomy for Cervical Cancer. N Engl J Med 379 (20): 1895-1904, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Melamed A, Margul DJ, Chen L, et al.: Survival after Minimally Invasive Radical Hysterectomy for Early-Stage Cervical Cancer. N Engl J Med 379 (20): 1905-1914, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Covens A, Shaw P, Murphy J, et al.: Is radical trachelectomy a safe alternative to radical hysterectomy for patients with stage IA-B carcinoma of the cervix? Cancer 86 (11): 2273-9, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Dargent D, Martin X, Sacchetoni A, et al.: Laparoscopic vaginal radical trachelectomy: a treatment to preserve the fertility of cervical carcinoma patients. Cancer 88 (8): 1877-82, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Plante M, Renaud MC, Hoskins IA, et al.: Vaginal radical trachelectomy: a valuable fertility-preserving option in the management of early-stage cervical cancer. A series of 50 pregnancies and review of the literature. Gynecol Oncol 98 (1): 3-10, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Shepherd JH, Spencer C, Herod J, et al.: Radical vaginal trachelectomy as a fertility-sparing procedure in women with early-stage cervical cancer-cumulative pregnancy rate in a series of 123 women. BJOG 113 (6): 719-24, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Wethington SL, Cibula D, Duska LR, et al.: An international series on abdominal radical trachelectomy: 101 patients and 28 pregnancies. Int J Gynecol Cancer 22 (7): 1251-7, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Grigsby PW, Perez CA: Radiotherapy alone for medically inoperable carcinoma of the cervix: stage IA and carcinoma in situ. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 21 (2): 375-8, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Treatment Options for Stages IB and IIA Cervical CancerRadiation therapy with concomitant chemotherapyRadical hysterectomy and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy with or without total pelvic radiation therapy plus chemotherapyRadical trachelectomyRadiation therapy aloneNeoadjuvant chemotherapyIMRT Current Clinical Trials Radiation therapy with concomitant chemotherapy Radical hysterectomy and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy with or without total pelvic radiation therapy plus chemotherapy Radical trachelectomy Radiation therapy alone Neoadjuvant chemotherapy IMRT Treatment options for stage IB and stage IIA cervical cancer include the following: Radiation therapy with concomitant chemotherapy. Radical hysterectomy and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy with or without total pelvic radiation therapy plus chemotherapy. Radical trachelectomy. Radiation therapy alone. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (under clinical evaluation). IMRT (under clinical evaluation). The size of the tumor is an important prognostic factor and should be carefully evaluated in choosing optimal therapy.[1] Either radiation therapy or radical hysterectomy and bilateral lymph–node
dissection results in cure rates of 85% to 90%
for women with Fédération Internationale de Gynécologie et d’Obstétrique (FIGO) stages IA2 and IB1 small-volume disease.  The choice of either treatment depends on
patient factors and available local expertise.  A randomized trial reported
identical 5-year overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) rates when comparing
radiation therapy with radical hysterectomy.[2] In stage IB2, for tumors that expand the cervix more than 4
cm, the primary treatment should be concomitant chemotherapy and radiation therapy.[3] Concurrent, cisplatin-based chemotherapy with radiation therapy is the standard of care for women who require radiation
therapy for treatment of cervical cancer.[4-10] Radiation therapy protocols for patients with cervical cancer have historically used dosing at two anatomical points, termed point A and point B, to standardize the doses received.  Point A is defined as 2 cm from the external os, and 2 cm lateral, relative to the endocervical canal.   Point B is also 2 cm from the external os, and 5 cm lateral from the patient midline, relative to the bony pelvis.  In general, for smaller tumors, the curative-intent dose for point A is around 70 Gy, whereas for larger tumors, the  point A dose may approach 90 Gy. Evidence (radiation with concomitant chemotherapy): Three randomized phase III trials have shown an OS advantage for
cisplatin-based therapy given concurrently with radiation therapy,[4-7] while
one trial that examined this regimen demonstrated no benefit.[8]  The patient
populations in these studies included women with FIGO stages IB2 to IVA
cervical cancer treated with primary radiation therapy, and women with FIGO
stages I to IIA disease who, at the time of primary surgery, were  found to have poor prognostic factors, including  metastatic disease in pelvic lymph nodes, parametrial disease, and positive surgical margins.Although the positive trials vary
somewhat in terms of the stage of disease, dose of radiation, and schedule of
cisplatin and radiation, the trials  demonstrate significant survival benefit for
this combined approach.The risk of death from cervical cancer was decreased
by 30% to 50% with the use of  concurrent chemoradiation therapy.Other trials have confirmed these findings.[9,10] Although the positive trials vary
somewhat in terms of the stage of disease, dose of radiation, and schedule of
cisplatin and radiation, the trials  demonstrate significant survival benefit for
this combined approach. The risk of death from cervical cancer was decreased
by 30% to 50% with the use of  concurrent chemoradiation therapy. Other trials have confirmed these findings.[9,10] Standard radiation therapy for cervical cancer includes brachytherapy after  external-beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Although low-dose rate (LDR) brachytherapy, typically with cesium Cs 137 (137Cs), has been the traditional approach, the use of high-dose rate (HDR) therapy, typically with iridium Ir 192, is rapidly increasing. HDR brachytherapy has the advantages of eliminating radiation exposure to medical personnel, a shorter treatment time, patient convenience, and improved outpatient management. The American Brachytherapy Society has published guidelines for the use of LDR and HDR brachytherapy as components of cervical cancer treatment.[11,12] Evidence (brachytherapy): In three randomized trials, HDR brachytherapy was comparable with LDR brachytherapy in terms of local-regional control and complication rates.[13-15][Level of evidence B1]Surgery after radiation therapy may be indicated for some patients with tumors confined to the cervix that respond incompletely to radiation therapy or for patients whose  vaginal anatomy precludes optimal brachytherapy.[16] Surgery after radiation therapy may be indicated for some patients with tumors confined to the cervix that respond incompletely to radiation therapy or for patients whose  vaginal anatomy precludes optimal brachytherapy.[16] The resection of macroscopically involved pelvic nodes may
improve rates of local control with postoperative  radiation therapy.[17] Patients who underwent
extraperitoneal lymph–node sampling had fewer bowel complications than those
who had transperitoneal lymph–node sampling.[18-20]  Patients with close
vaginal margins (<0.5 cm) may also benefit from pelvic radiation therapy.[21] Radical hysterectomy and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy may be considered for women with stages IB to IIA disease. Evidence (radical hysterectomy and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy with or without total pelvic radiation therapy plus chemotherapy): An Italian group randomly assigned 343 women with stage IB and IIA cervical cancer to surgery or radiation therapy. The radiation therapy included EBRT and one 137Cs LDR insertion, with a total dose to point A from 70 to 90 Gy (median 76 Gy).   Patients in the surgery arm underwent a class III radical hysterectomy, pelvic lymphadenectomy, and selective, para-aortic lymph–node dissection.  Adjuvant radiation therapy was given to patients with high-risk pathological features in the uterine specimen or positive lymph nodes.  Adjuvant radiation therapy was EBRT to a total dose of 50.4 Gy over 5 to 6 weeks.[2][Level of evidence A1] The primary outcome was OS at 5 years, with secondary measures of rate of recurrence and complications.  With a median follow-up of 87 months, the OS rate was the same in both groups at 83% (hazard ratio [HR], 1.2; 95% confidence interval [CI],  0.7–2.3; P = .8).  Complications were highest among the patients who received adjuvant radiation after surgery.In general, radical hysterectomy should be avoided in patients who are likely to require adjuvant therapy. The primary outcome was OS at 5 years, with secondary measures of rate of recurrence and complications.  With a median follow-up of 87 months, the OS rate was the same in both groups at 83% (hazard ratio [HR], 1.2; 95% confidence interval [CI],  0.7–2.3; P = .8). Complications were highest among the patients who received adjuvant radiation after surgery. In general, radical hysterectomy should be avoided in patients who are likely to require adjuvant therapy. Evidence (open abdominal surgery  [open] versus minimally invasive surgery [MIS]): A multicenter, international, randomized trial, the  Laparoscopic Approach to Cervical Cancer (LACC [NCT00614211]) trial,  explored the efficacy of radical hysterectomy and staging via open abdominal surgery  (open) versus MIS for patients with early-stage cervical cancer.[22]   Patients with stages IA1 (with lymphovascular space invasion), IA2, and IB1 disease and histological subtypes of squamous cell, adenocarcinoma or adenosquamous carcinoma were eligible for inclusion.  The primary end point was noninferiority of MIS compared with open surgery; the metric used was the percent of  disease-free patients at 4.5 years postsurgery.  The secondary end points were a comparison of the recurrence and survival rates between the two groups.Of the planned 740 patients, 632 were accrued when the study  was stopped early because of  an imbalance in deaths between the two groups.  Of 631 eligible patients, 319 were assigned to MIS and 312 to open surgery.The DFS rate at 4.5 years was 86% for the MIS group and 96.5% for the open group, a difference of 10.6 percentage points (95% CI,  -16.4 to -4.7).  At 3 years, the MIS group had a DFS rate of 91.2% versus 97.1% for the open surgery group (HR for disease recurrence or death, 3.74; 95% CI,  1.63–8.58).  The MIS group also had a lower OS rate at 3 years (OS,  93.8% vs. 99.0% for the open surgery group; HR for death from any cause, 6.0;  95% CI, 1.77– 20.30).[22][Level of evidence A1]  The study concluded that MIS was inferior to an open abdominal approach and should not replace open surgery as the standard for cervical cancer patients. An epidemiological study using two large U.S. databases (National Cancer Database [NCDB] and Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results [SEER] Program database) confirmed a reduction in OS in patients undergoing MIS radical hysterectomy for stage IA2 and stage IB1 cervical cancer from 2010 to 2013.   Additionally, among women who underwent radical hysterectomy in the years 2000 to 2010, there was a decrease in OS after 2006, coincident with the widespread adoption of MIS for cervical cancer.[23][Level of evidence C1] Of the planned 740 patients, 632 were accrued when the study  was stopped early because of  an imbalance in deaths between the two groups.  Of 631 eligible patients, 319 were assigned to MIS and 312 to open surgery. The DFS rate at 4.5 years was 86% for the MIS group and 96.5% for the open group, a difference of 10.6 percentage points (95% CI,  -16.4 to -4.7).  At 3 years, the MIS group had a DFS rate of 91.2% versus 97.1% for the open surgery group (HR for disease recurrence or death, 3.74; 95% CI,  1.63–8.58). The MIS group also had a lower OS rate at 3 years (OS,  93.8% vs. 99.0% for the open surgery group; HR for death from any cause, 6.0;  95% CI, 1.77– 20.30).[22][Level of evidence A1] The study concluded that MIS was inferior to an open abdominal approach and should not replace open surgery as the standard for cervical cancer patients. Although questions remain regarding the use of MIS radical hysterectomy for some subpopulations of good-risk patients, the data from this trial suggest that open abdominal surgery should be considered the standard of care for patients with early-stage cervical cancer who are candidates for  radical hysterectomy. Based on recurrence rates in clinical trials, two classes of recurrence risk have been defined.  Patients with a combination of large tumor size, lymph vascular space invasion, and deep stromal invasion in the hysterectomy specimen are deemed to have intermediate-risk disease. These patients are candidates for adjuvant EBRT.[24]  Patients whose pathology shows positive margins, positive parametria, or positive lymph nodes are  high-risk candidates for recurrence. Evidence (adjuvant radiation therapy postsurgery): The Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG) compared adjuvant radiation therapy alone with radiation therapy plus cisplatin plus fluorouracil (5-FU) after radical hysterectomy for patients in the high-risk group.  Postoperative patients were eligible if their pathology showed any one of the following: positive parametria, positive margins, or positive lymph nodes.  Patients in both arms received 49 Gy to the pelvis. Patients in the experimental arm also received cisplatin (70 mg/m2) and a 96-hour infusion of 5-FU (1,000 mg/m2/d every 3 weeks for four cycles); the first two cycles were concurrent with the radiation therapy.[6][Level of evidence A1]   There were 268 patients evaluated with a primary end point of OS. The study results were  reported early because of the positive results in other trials of concomitant cisplatin and radiation therapy.The estimated 4-year survival rate was 81% for chemotherapy plus radiation therapy and 71% for radiation therapy alone (HR, 1.96; P = .007).As expected, grade 4 toxicity was more common in the chemotherapy plus radiation therapy group, with hematologic toxicity predominating. There were 268 patients evaluated with a primary end point of OS. The study results were  reported early because of the positive results in other trials of concomitant cisplatin and radiation therapy. The estimated 4-year survival rate was 81% for chemotherapy plus radiation therapy and 71% for radiation therapy alone (HR, 1.96; P = .007). As expected, grade 4 toxicity was more common in the chemotherapy plus radiation therapy group, with hematologic toxicity predominating. Radical surgery has been performed for small lesions, but the high incidence of pathological factors leading to postoperative radiation with or without chemotherapy make primary concomitant chemotherapy and radiation a more common approach in patients with larger tumors. Radiation in the range of
50 Gy administered for  5 weeks plus chemotherapy with cisplatin with or without
5-FU should be considered in patients with a  high risk of recurrence. After
surgical staging, patients found to have small-volume para-aortic nodal disease
and controllable pelvic disease may be cured with pelvic and para-aortic
radiation therapy.[25]  Treatment of patients with unresected para-aortic nodes with extended-field radiation therapy and chemotherapy leads to
long-term disease control in patients with low-volume (<2 cm) nodal
disease below L3.[18]  A single study (RTOG-7920) showed a survival advantage in patients
with tumors larger than 4 cm who received radiation therapy to para-aortic
nodes without histological evidence of disease.[26]  Toxic effects were greater with para-aortic
radiation therapy than with pelvic radiation therapy alone but were mostly confined to
patients with previous  abdominopelvic surgery.[26] The use of intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) may minimize the effects  to the small bowel usually associated with this treatment.[27] Patients with presumed early-stage disease who desire future fertility may be candidates for radical trachelectomy.  In this procedure, the cervix and lateral parametrial tissues are removed, and the uterine body and ovaries are maintained.  The patient selection differs somewhat between groups; however, general criteria include the following: Desire for future pregnancy. Age younger than 40 years. Presumed stage IA2 to IB1 disease and a lesion size no greater than 2 cm. Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging that shows a margin from the most distal edge of the tumor to the lower uterine segment. Squamous, adenosquamous, or adenocarcinoma cell types. Intraoperatively, the patient is assessed in a manner similar to a radical hysterectomy; the procedure is aborted if more advanced disease than expected is encountered.  The margins of the specimen are also assessed at the time of surgery, and a radical hysterectomy is performed if inadequate margins are obtained.[28-32] External-beam pelvic radiation therapy combined with two  or more
intracavitary brachytherapy applications is appropriate therapy for patients with stage IA2 and IB1 lesions. For patients with stage IB2 and larger lesions, radiosensitizing chemotherapy is indicated. The role of radiosensitizing chemotherapy in patients with stage IA2 and IB1 lesions is untested. However, it may prove beneficial in certain cases. Several groups have investigated the role of neoadjuvant chemotherapy to convert patients who are conventional candidates for chemoradiation into candidates for radical surgery.[33-37]   Multiple regimens have been used; however, almost all use a platinum backbone.  The largest randomized trial to date  was reported in 2001, and its accrual was completed before the standard of care included the addition of cisplatin to radiation therapy.[38]  As a result, the control arm received radiation therapy alone. Although there was an improvement in OS for the experimental arm, the results do not reflect current practice.  This study accrued patients with stages IB through IVA disease, but improvement in the experimental arm was only noted for participants with early-stage disease (stages IB, IIA, or IIB). EORTC-55994 (NCT00039338)  randomly assigned patients with stages IB2, IIA2, and IIB cervical cancer to standard chemoradiation or neoadjuvant chemotherapy (with a cisplatin backbone for three cycles) followed by evaluation for surgery.  With OS as the primary end point, this trial may delineate whether there is a role for neoadjuvant chemotherapy for this patient population. IMRT is a radiation therapy technique that allows for conformal dosing of target anatomy while sparing neighboring tissue. Theoretically, this technique should decrease radiation therapy–related toxicity, but this could come at the cost of decreased efficacy if tissue is inappropriately excluded from the treatment field.  Several institutions have reported their experience with IMRT for postoperative adjuvant therapy in patients with intermediate-risk and high-risk disease after radical surgery.[39-41]   A Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) phase II trial (RTOG-0418 [NCT00331760]) evaluated the use of IMRT in patients with both cervical and endometrial cancers who require adjuvant radiation therapy. Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Perez CA, Grigsby PW, Nene SM, et al.: Effect of tumor size on the prognosis of carcinoma of the uterine cervix treated with irradiation alone. Cancer 69 (11): 2796-806, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Landoni F, Maneo A, Colombo A, et al.: Randomised study of radical surgery versus radiotherapy for stage Ib-IIa cervical cancer. Lancet 350 (9077): 535-40, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Eifel PJ, Burke TW, Delclos L, et al.: Early stage I adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix: treatment results in patients with tumors less than or equal to 4 cm in diameter. Gynecol Oncol 41 (3): 199-205, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Morris M, Eifel PJ, Lu J, et al.: Pelvic radiation with concurrent chemotherapy compared with pelvic and para-aortic radiation for high-risk cervical cancer. N Engl J Med 340 (15): 1137-43, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Keys HM, Bundy BN, Stehman FB, et al.: Cisplatin, radiation, and adjuvant hysterectomy compared with radiation and adjuvant hysterectomy for bulky stage IB cervical carcinoma. N Engl J Med 340 (15): 1154-61, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Peters WA, Liu PY, Barrett RJ, et al.: Concurrent chemotherapy and pelvic radiation therapy compared with pelvic radiation therapy alone as adjuvant therapy after radical surgery in high-risk early-stage cancer of the cervix. J Clin Oncol 18 (8): 1606-13, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Thomas GM: Improved treatment for cervical cancer--concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy. N Engl J Med 340 (15): 1198-200, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Pearcey R, Brundage M, Drouin P, et al.: Phase III trial comparing radical radiotherapy with and without cisplatin chemotherapy in patients with advanced squamous cell cancer of the cervix. J Clin Oncol 20 (4): 966-72, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Rose PG, Bundy BN: Chemoradiation for locally advanced cervical cancer: does it help? J Clin Oncol 20 (4): 891-3, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Chemoradiotherapy for Cervical Cancer Meta-Analysis Collaboration: Reducing uncertainties about the effects of chemoradiotherapy for cervical cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of individual patient data from 18 randomized trials. J Clin Oncol 26 (35): 5802-12, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Nag S, Chao C, Erickson B, et al.: The American Brachytherapy Society recommendations for low-dose-rate brachytherapy for carcinoma of the cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 52 (1): 33-48, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Nag S, Erickson B, Thomadsen B, et al.: The American Brachytherapy Society recommendations for high-dose-rate brachytherapy for carcinoma of the cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 48 (1): 201-11, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Patel FD, Sharma SC, Negi PS, et al.: Low dose rate vs. high dose rate brachytherapy in the treatment of carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a clinical trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 28 (2): 335-41, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Hareyama M, Sakata K, Oouchi A, et al.: High-dose-rate versus low-dose-rate intracavitary therapy for carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a randomized trial. Cancer 94 (1): 117-24, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Lertsanguansinchai P, Lertbutsayanukul C, Shotelersuk K, et al.: Phase III randomized trial comparing LDR and HDR brachytherapy in treatment of cervical carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 59 (5): 1424-31, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Thoms WW, Eifel PJ, Smith TL, et al.: Bulky endocervical carcinoma: a 23-year experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 23 (3): 491-9, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Downey GO, Potish RA, Adcock LL, et al.: Pretreatment surgical staging in cervical carcinoma: therapeutic efficacy of pelvic lymph node resection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 160 (5 Pt 1): 1055-61, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Vigliotti AP, Wen BC, Hussey DH, et al.: Extended field irradiation for carcinoma of the uterine cervix with positive periaortic nodes. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 23 (3): 501-9, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Weiser EB, Bundy BN, Hoskins WJ, et al.: Extraperitoneal versus transperitoneal selective paraaortic lymphadenectomy in the pretreatment surgical staging of advanced cervical carcinoma (a Gynecologic Oncology Group study). Gynecol Oncol 33 (3): 283-9, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Fine BA, Hempling RE, Piver MS, et al.: Severe radiation morbidity in carcinoma of the cervix: impact of pretherapy surgical staging and previous surgery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 31 (4): 717-23, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Estape RE, Angioli R, Madrigal M, et al.: Close vaginal margins as a prognostic factor after radical hysterectomy. Gynecol Oncol 68 (3): 229-32, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Ramirez PT, Frumovitz M, Pareja R, et al.: Minimally Invasive versus Abdominal Radical Hysterectomy for Cervical Cancer. N Engl J Med 379 (20): 1895-1904, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Melamed A, Margul DJ, Chen L, et al.: Survival after Minimally Invasive Radical Hysterectomy for Early-Stage Cervical Cancer. N Engl J Med 379 (20): 1905-1914, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Sedlis A, Bundy BN, Rotman MZ, et al.: A randomized trial of pelvic radiation therapy versus no further therapy in selected patients with stage IB carcinoma of the cervix after radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy: A Gynecologic Oncology Group Study. Gynecol Oncol 73 (2): 177-83, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Cunningham MJ, Dunton CJ, Corn B, et al.: Extended-field radiation therapy in early-stage cervical carcinoma: survival and complications. Gynecol Oncol 43 (1): 51-4, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Rotman M, Pajak TF, Choi K, et al.: Prophylactic extended-field irradiation of para-aortic lymph nodes in stages IIB and bulky IB and IIA cervical carcinomas. Ten-year treatment results of RTOG 79-20. JAMA 274 (5): 387-93, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Poorvu PD, Sadow CA, Townamchai K, et al.: Duodenal and other gastrointestinal toxicity in cervical and endometrial cancer treated with extended-field intensity modulated radiation therapy to paraaortic lymph nodes. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 85 (5): 1262-8, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Covens A, Shaw P, Murphy J, et al.: Is radical trachelectomy a safe alternative to radical hysterectomy for patients with stage IA-B carcinoma of the cervix? Cancer 86 (11): 2273-9, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Dargent D, Martin X, Sacchetoni A, et al.: Laparoscopic vaginal radical trachelectomy: a treatment to preserve the fertility of cervical carcinoma patients. Cancer 88 (8): 1877-82, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Plante M, Renaud MC, Hoskins IA, et al.: Vaginal radical trachelectomy: a valuable fertility-preserving option in the management of early-stage cervical cancer. A series of 50 pregnancies and review of the literature. Gynecol Oncol 98 (1): 3-10, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Shepherd JH, Spencer C, Herod J, et al.: Radical vaginal trachelectomy as a fertility-sparing procedure in women with early-stage cervical cancer-cumulative pregnancy rate in a series of 123 women. BJOG 113 (6): 719-24, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Wethington SL, Cibula D, Duska LR, et al.: An international series on abdominal radical trachelectomy: 101 patients and 28 pregnancies. Int J Gynecol Cancer 22 (7): 1251-7, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Ferrandina G, Margariti PA, Smaniotto D, et al.: Long-term analysis of clinical outcome and complications in locally advanced cervical cancer patients administered concomitant chemoradiation followed by radical surgery. Gynecol Oncol 119 (3): 404-10, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Ferrandina G, Distefano MG, De Vincenzo R, et al.: Paclitaxel, epirubicin, and cisplatin (TEP) regimen as neoadjuvant treatment in locally advanced cervical cancer: long-term results. Gynecol Oncol 128 (3): 518-23, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Zanaboni F, Grijuela B, Giudici S, et al.: Weekly topotecan and cisplatin (TOPOCIS) as neo-adjuvant chemotherapy for locally-advanced squamous cervical carcinoma: Results of a phase II multicentric study. Eur J Cancer 49 (5): 1065-72, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Manci N, Marchetti C, Di Tucci C, et al.: A prospective phase II study of topotecan (Hycamtin®) and cisplatin as neoadjuvant chemotherapy in locally advanced cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol 122 (2): 285-90, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Gong L, Lou JY, Wang P, et al.: Clinical evaluation of neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by radical surgery in the management of stage IB2-IIB cervical cancer. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 117 (1): 23-6, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Benedetti-Panici P, Greggi S, Colombo A, et al.: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and radical surgery versus exclusive radiotherapy in locally advanced squamous cell cervical cancer: results from the Italian multicenter randomized study. J Clin Oncol 20 (1): 179-88, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Chen MF, Tseng CJ, Tseng CC, et al.: Adjuvant concurrent chemoradiotherapy with intensity-modulated pelvic radiotherapy after surgery for high-risk, early stage cervical cancer patients. Cancer J 14 (3): 200-6, 2008 May-Jun. [PUBMED Abstract] Hasselle MD, Rose BS, Kochanski JD, et al.: Clinical outcomes of intensity-modulated pelvic radiation therapy for carcinoma of the cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 80 (5): 1436-45, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Folkert MR, Shih KK, Abu-Rustum NR, et al.: Postoperative pelvic intensity-modulated radiotherapy and concurrent chemotherapy in intermediate- and high-risk cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol 128 (2): 288-93, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Treatment Options for Stages IIB, III, and IVA Cervical CancerRadiation therapy with concomitant chemotherapyInterstitial brachytherapyNeoadjuvant chemotherapy Lymph Node Management Current Clinical Trials Radiation therapy with concomitant chemotherapy Interstitial brachytherapy Neoadjuvant chemotherapy The size of the primary tumor is an important prognostic factor and should be
carefully evaluated in choosing optimal therapy.[1] Survival and local control
are better with unilateral rather than bilateral parametrial involvement.[2] Patterns-of-care studies
in stages IIIA and IIIB patients indicate that survival is dependent on the extent
of the disease, with unilateral pelvic wall involvement predicting a better
outcome than bilateral involvement, which in turn predicts a better outcome
than involvement of the lower third of the vaginal wall.[2]  These studies also
reveal a progressive increase in local control and survival paralleling a
progressive increase in paracentral (point A) dose and use of intracavitary
treatment.  The highest rate of central control was seen with paracentral
(point A) doses of  more than 85 Gy.[3] Treatment options for stage IIB, stage III, and stage IVA cervical cancer include the following: Radiation therapy with concomitant chemotherapy. [4] Interstitial brachytherapy. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Strong
consideration should be given to the use of intracavitary radiation therapy and external-beam radiation therapy (EBRT) to the pelvis combined with cisplatin or cisplatin/fluorouracil  (5-FU).[5-12] Evidence (radiation therapy with concomitant chemotherapy): Five randomized phase III trials  have shown an overall survival  (OS) advantage for
cisplatin-based therapy given concurrently with radiation therapy,[5-10] but 
one trial that examined this regimen demonstrated no benefit.[13]  The patient
populations in these studies included women with Fédération Internationale de Gynécologie et d’Obstétrique (FIGO) stages IB2 to IVA
cervical cancer treated with primary radiation therapy, and women with FIGO
stages I to IIA disease who, at the time of primary surgery, were  found to have poor prognostic factors, including metastatic disease in pelvic lymph nodes, parametrial disease, and positive surgical margins.  Although the positive trials vary
somewhat in terms of the stage of disease, dose of radiation, and schedule of
cisplatin and radiation, the trials  demonstrate significant survival benefit for
this combined approach.The risk of death from cervical cancer was decreased
by 30% to 50% with the use of  concurrent chemoradiation therapy. Although the positive trials vary
somewhat in terms of the stage of disease, dose of radiation, and schedule of
cisplatin and radiation, the trials  demonstrate significant survival benefit for
this combined approach. The risk of death from cervical cancer was decreased
by 30% to 50% with the use of  concurrent chemoradiation therapy. Evidence (low-dose rate vs. high-dose rate intracavitary radiation therapy): Although low-dose rate (LDR) brachytherapy, typically with cesium Cs 137, has been the traditional approach, the use of high-dose rate (HDR) therapy, typically with iridium Ir 192, is rapidly increasing. HDR brachytherapy provides the advantage of eliminating radiation exposure to medical personnel, a shorter treatment time, patient convenience, and improved outpatient management.  The American Brachytherapy Society has published guidelines for the use of LDR and HDR brachytherapy as a component of cervical cancer treatment.[14,15] In three  randomized trials, HDR brachytherapy was comparable with LDR brachytherapy in terms of local-regional control and complication rates.[16-18][Level of evidence B1] In an attempt to improve upon standard chemoradiation, a phase III randomized trial compared concurrent gemcitabine plus cisplatin and radiation therapy followed by adjuvant gemcitabine and cisplatin (experimental arm) with concurrent cisplatin plus radiation (standard chemoradiation) in patients with stages IIB to IVA cervical cancer.[19][Level of evidence A1]  A total of 515 patients from nine countries were enrolled.  The schedule for the experimental arm was cisplatin (40 mg/m2) and gemcitabine (125 mg/m2) weekly for 6 weeks, with concurrent EBRT (50.4 Gy in 28 fractions) followed by brachytherapy (30–35 Gy in 96 hours) and then two adjuvant 21-day cycles of cisplatin (50 mg/m2) on day 1 plus gemcitabine (1,000 mg/m2) on days 1 and 8.  The standard arm was cisplatin (40 mg/m2) weekly for 6 weeks with concurrent EBRT  and brachytherapy as described for the experimental arm.The primary end point was progression-free survival (PFS) at 3 years; however, the study found improvement in the experimental arm for PFS at 3 years (74.4%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 68%–79.8% vs. 65.0%; 95% CI, 58.5%–70.7%); overall PFS (hazard ratio [HR], 0.68; 95% CI, 0.49–0.95); and OS (HR, 0.68; 95% CI, 0.49–0.95).  Patients in the experimental arm had increased hematologic and nonhematologic grade 3 or 4 toxic effects, and two deaths in the experimental arm were possibly related to treatment. A subgroup analysis showed an increased benefit in patients with a higher stage of disease (stages III–IVA vs. stage IIB), which suggested  that the increased toxic effects of the experimental protocol may be justified for these patients.[20] Additional investigation is needed to determine which aspect of the experimental arm led to improved survival (i.e., the addition of the weekly gemcitabine, the adjuvant chemotherapy, or both) and to determine quality of life during and after treatment, a  condition  that  was omitted from the protocol. The primary end point was progression-free survival (PFS) at 3 years; however, the study found improvement in the experimental arm for PFS at 3 years (74.4%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 68%–79.8% vs. 65.0%; 95% CI, 58.5%–70.7%); overall PFS (hazard ratio [HR], 0.68; 95% CI, 0.49–0.95); and OS (HR, 0.68; 95% CI, 0.49–0.95).  Patients in the experimental arm had increased hematologic and nonhematologic grade 3 or 4 toxic effects, and two deaths in the experimental arm were possibly related to treatment. A subgroup analysis showed an increased benefit in patients with a higher stage of disease (stages III–IVA vs. stage IIB), which suggested  that the increased toxic effects of the experimental protocol may be justified for these patients.[20] Additional investigation is needed to determine which aspect of the experimental arm led to improved survival (i.e., the addition of the weekly gemcitabine, the adjuvant chemotherapy, or both) and to determine quality of life during and after treatment, a  condition  that  was omitted from the protocol. For patients who complete EBRT and have bulky cervical disease such that standard brachytherapy cannot be placed anatomically, interstitial brachytherapy has been used to deliver adequate tumoricidal doses with an acceptable toxicity profile.[21] Several groups have investigated the role of neoadjuvant chemotherapy to convert patients who are conventional candidates for chemoradiation into candidates for radical surgery.[22-26]   Multiple regimens have been used; however, almost all use a platinum backbone.  The largest randomized trial to date  was reported in 2001, and its accrual was completed before the standard of care included the addition of cisplatin to radiation therapy.[27]  As a result, although there was an improvement in OS for the experimental arm, the results are not reflective of current practice.  This study accrued patients with stages IB through IVA disease, but improvement in the experimental arm was only noted for participants with early-stage disease (stages IB, IIA, or IIB). EORTC-55994 (NCT00039338) randomly assigned patients with stages IB2, IIA2, and IIB cervical cancer to standard chemoradiation or neoadjuvant chemotherapy (with a cisplatin backbone for three cycles) followed by evaluation for surgery.  With OS as the primary end point, this trial may delineate whether there is a role for neoadjuvant chemotherapy for this patient population. Patients who are surgically staged as part of a clinical trial and are found to
have small-volume para-aortic nodal disease and controllable pelvic disease may
be cured with pelvic and para-aortic radiation therapy.[28] Treatment of patients with unresected periaortic nodes with extended-field
radiation therapy leads to long-term disease control in patients with low-volume
(<2 cm) nodal disease below L3.[29]   A single study  (RTOG-7920) showed a survival advantage
in patients who received radiation therapy to para-aortic nodes without histological
evidence of disease.[30] Toxic effects are greater with para-aortic radiation than
with pelvic radiation alone but were mostly confined to patients with previous 
abdominopelvic surgery.[30] If postoperative
 EBRT is planned following surgery, extraperitoneal lymph–node
sampling is associated with fewer radiation-induced complications than a
transperitoneal approach.[31]  Patients who underwent extraperitoneal lymph–node
sampling had fewer bowel complications than those who had transperitoneal lymph–node sampling.[29,31,32] The resection of macroscopically involved pelvic
nodes may improve rates of local control with postoperative radiation
therapy.[33] In addition, prospective data points to improvement in outcomes for patients who undergo resection of positive para-aortic lymph nodes before curative intent chemoradiation therapy; however, only patients with minimal nodal involvement (<5 mm) benefited.[34] Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Perez CA, Grigsby PW, Nene SM, et al.: Effect of tumor size on the prognosis of carcinoma of the uterine cervix treated with irradiation alone. Cancer 69 (11): 2796-806, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Lanciano RM, Won M, Hanks GE: A reappraisal of the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics staging system for cervical cancer. A study of patterns of care. Cancer 69 (2): 482-7, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Lanciano RM, Martz K, Coia LR, et al.: Tumor and treatment factors improving outcome in stage III-B cervix cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 20 (1): 95-100, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Monk BJ, Tewari KS, Koh WJ: Multimodality therapy for locally advanced cervical carcinoma: state of the art and future directions. J Clin Oncol 25 (20): 2952-65, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Whitney CW, Sause W, Bundy BN, et al.: Randomized comparison of fluorouracil plus cisplatin versus hydroxyurea as an adjunct to radiation therapy in stage IIB-IVA carcinoma of the cervix with negative para-aortic lymph nodes: a Gynecologic Oncology Group and Southwest Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 17 (5): 1339-48, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Morris M, Eifel PJ, Lu J, et al.: Pelvic radiation with concurrent chemotherapy compared with pelvic and para-aortic radiation for high-risk cervical cancer. N Engl J Med 340 (15): 1137-43, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Rose PG, Bundy BN, Watkins EB, et al.: Concurrent cisplatin-based radiotherapy and chemotherapy for locally advanced cervical cancer. N Engl J Med 340 (15): 1144-53, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Keys HM, Bundy BN, Stehman FB, et al.: Cisplatin, radiation, and adjuvant hysterectomy compared with radiation and adjuvant hysterectomy for bulky stage IB cervical carcinoma. N Engl J Med 340 (15): 1154-61, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Peters WA, Liu PY, Barrett RJ, et al.: Concurrent chemotherapy and pelvic radiation therapy compared with pelvic radiation therapy alone as adjuvant therapy after radical surgery in high-risk early-stage cancer of the cervix. J Clin Oncol 18 (8): 1606-13, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Thomas GM: Improved treatment for cervical cancer--concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy. N Engl J Med 340 (15): 1198-200, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Rose PG, Bundy BN: Chemoradiation for locally advanced cervical cancer: does it help? J Clin Oncol 20 (4): 891-3, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Chemoradiotherapy for Cervical Cancer Meta-Analysis Collaboration: Reducing uncertainties about the effects of chemoradiotherapy for cervical cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of individual patient data from 18 randomized trials. J Clin Oncol 26 (35): 5802-12, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Pearcey R, Brundage M, Drouin P, et al.: Phase III trial comparing radical radiotherapy with and without cisplatin chemotherapy in patients with advanced squamous cell cancer of the cervix. J Clin Oncol 20 (4): 966-72, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Nag S, Chao C, Erickson B, et al.: The American Brachytherapy Society recommendations for low-dose-rate brachytherapy for carcinoma of the cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 52 (1): 33-48, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Nag S, Erickson B, Thomadsen B, et al.: The American Brachytherapy Society recommendations for high-dose-rate brachytherapy for carcinoma of the cervix. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 48 (1): 201-11, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Patel FD, Sharma SC, Negi PS, et al.: Low dose rate vs. high dose rate brachytherapy in the treatment of carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a clinical trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 28 (2): 335-41, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Hareyama M, Sakata K, Oouchi A, et al.: High-dose-rate versus low-dose-rate intracavitary therapy for carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a randomized trial. Cancer 94 (1): 117-24, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Lertsanguansinchai P, Lertbutsayanukul C, Shotelersuk K, et al.: Phase III randomized trial comparing LDR and HDR brachytherapy in treatment of cervical carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 59 (5): 1424-31, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Dueñas-González A, Zarbá JJ, Patel F, et al.: Phase III, open-label, randomized study comparing concurrent gemcitabine plus cisplatin and radiation followed by adjuvant gemcitabine and cisplatin versus concurrent cisplatin and radiation in patients with stage IIB to IVA carcinoma of the cervix. J Clin Oncol 29 (13): 1678-85, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Dueňas-González A, Orlando M, Zhou Y, et al.: Efficacy in high burden locally advanced cervical cancer with concurrent gemcitabine and cisplatin chemoradiotherapy plus adjuvant gemcitabine and cisplatin: prognostic and predictive factors and the impact of disease stage on outcomes from a prospective randomized phase III trial. Gynecol Oncol 126 (3): 334-40, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Pinn-Bingham M, Puthawala AA, Syed AM, et al.: Outcomes of high-dose-rate interstitial brachytherapy in the treatment of locally advanced cervical cancer: long-term results. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 85 (3): 714-20, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Ferrandina G, Margariti PA, Smaniotto D, et al.: Long-term analysis of clinical outcome and complications in locally advanced cervical cancer patients administered concomitant chemoradiation followed by radical surgery. Gynecol Oncol 119 (3): 404-10, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Ferrandina G, Distefano MG, De Vincenzo R, et al.: Paclitaxel, epirubicin, and cisplatin (TEP) regimen as neoadjuvant treatment in locally advanced cervical cancer: long-term results. Gynecol Oncol 128 (3): 518-23, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Zanaboni F, Grijuela B, Giudici S, et al.: Weekly topotecan and cisplatin (TOPOCIS) as neo-adjuvant chemotherapy for locally-advanced squamous cervical carcinoma: Results of a phase II multicentric study. Eur J Cancer 49 (5): 1065-72, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Manci N, Marchetti C, Di Tucci C, et al.: A prospective phase II study of topotecan (Hycamtin®) and cisplatin as neoadjuvant chemotherapy in locally advanced cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol 122 (2): 285-90, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Gong L, Lou JY, Wang P, et al.: Clinical evaluation of neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by radical surgery in the management of stage IB2-IIB cervical cancer. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 117 (1): 23-6, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Benedetti-Panici P, Greggi S, Colombo A, et al.: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and radical surgery versus exclusive radiotherapy in locally advanced squamous cell cervical cancer: results from the Italian multicenter randomized study. J Clin Oncol 20 (1): 179-88, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Cunningham MJ, Dunton CJ, Corn B, et al.: Extended-field radiation therapy in early-stage cervical carcinoma: survival and complications. Gynecol Oncol 43 (1): 51-4, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Vigliotti AP, Wen BC, Hussey DH, et al.: Extended field irradiation for carcinoma of the uterine cervix with positive periaortic nodes. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 23 (3): 501-9, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Rotman M, Pajak TF, Choi K, et al.: Prophylactic extended-field irradiation of para-aortic lymph nodes in stages IIB and bulky IB and IIA cervical carcinomas. Ten-year treatment results of RTOG 79-20. JAMA 274 (5): 387-93, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Weiser EB, Bundy BN, Hoskins WJ, et al.: Extraperitoneal versus transperitoneal selective paraaortic lymphadenectomy in the pretreatment surgical staging of advanced cervical carcinoma (a Gynecologic Oncology Group study). Gynecol Oncol 33 (3): 283-9, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Fine BA, Hempling RE, Piver MS, et al.: Severe radiation morbidity in carcinoma of the cervix: impact of pretherapy surgical staging and previous surgery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 31 (4): 717-23, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Downey GO, Potish RA, Adcock LL, et al.: Pretreatment surgical staging in cervical carcinoma: therapeutic efficacy of pelvic lymph node resection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 160 (5 Pt 1): 1055-61, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Gouy S, Morice P, Narducci F, et al.: Prospective multicenter study evaluating the survival of patients with locally advanced cervical cancer undergoing laparoscopic para-aortic lymphadenectomy before chemoradiotherapy in the era of positron emission tomography imaging. J Clin Oncol 31 (24): 3026-33, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Treatment Options for Stage IVB Cervical CancerPalliative radiation therapyPalliative chemotherapy and other systemic therapy Current Clinical Trials Palliative radiation therapy Palliative chemotherapy and other systemic therapy Treatment options for stage IVB cervical cancer include the following: Palliative radiation therapy. Palliative chemotherapy and other systemic therapy. Phase I and phase II clinical trials of new anticancer drugs. Radiation therapy may be used to palliate central disease or distant
metastases. Multiple agents are associated with objective response rates; however, durable responses are rare. Drugs used in stage IVB cervical cancer treatment are shown in Table 6. Single-agent cisplatin administered intravenously at 50 mg/m² every 3 weeks has been the regimen most often used to treat recurrent cervical cancer since the drug was initially introduced in the 1970s.[2] More recently, the Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG) has reported on sequential randomized trials dealing with combination chemotherapy for stage IVB, recurrent, or persistent cervical cancer.[8,12-16] Evidence (cisplatin in combination with other drugs): GOG-110, GOG-0179, GOG-0169:GOG-110: The ifosfamide + cisplatin combination was superior to cisplatin alone in the secondary end point of response rates, but at the cost of increased toxicity.GOG-0179: The cisplatin + topotecan (CT) doublet combination had a significant advantage in overall survival (OS) compared with cisplatin alone, leading to approval of this indication for topotecan by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. However, cisplatin alone underperformed in this trial because as many as 40% of the patients had already received cisplatin up front as a radiosensitizer.[12]GOG-0169: The paclitaxel + cisplatin (PC) combination, similarly, was superior in response rates and progression-free survival (PFS), and its toxicity was similar to that of the single agent except in patients with GOG performance status 2 (scale: 0, asymptomatic–4, totally bedridden).  Therefore, PC was chosen as the reference arm in GOG-0204 (NCT00064077). GOG-0204 enrolled 513 patients and compared four cisplatin-based doublet regimens.  The trial was closed early because no one experimental arm was likely to significantly lower the hazard ratio (HR) of death relative to PC:[16]1.15 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.79–1.67) for vinorelbine + cisplatin (VC).1.32 (95% CI, 0.91–1.92) for gemcitabine plus cisplatin.1.27 (95% CI, 0.90–1.78) for CT. Trend in response rates, PFS, and OS favored CT.Patients in the four study arms experienced different grades of neutropenia, infection, and alopecia.[16] There were no differences in health-related quality of life during treatment.[17] However, there were more neurological side effects for PC. GOG-0240 (NCT00803062) was designed to answer the following two questions:[18]Can a nonplatinum combination show improvement over the standard of cisplatin-paclitaxel in this population, which was previously treated with cisplatin during radiation therapy?Can the addition of bevacizumab improve combination chemotherapy in patients with stages IVB, persistent, or recurrent cervical cancer?Patients were randomly assigned to one of the following four treatment arms:Cisplatin (50 mg/m2) + paclitaxel (135 mg/m2 or 175 mg/m2) on day 1 (PC).PC + bevacizumab (15mg/kg) on day 1.Topotecan (0.75 mg/m2) d1–d3 + paclitaxel (175 mg/m2) on day 1 (PT).PT + bevacizumab (15mg/kg) on day 1.Additional study methods and results included the following:The primary end point was OS, and  452 patients were evaluable.The combination PT was not superior to PC and had  a  HR for death of 1.2 (99% CI, 0.82–1.76).  Previous exposure to platinum did not affect this result.  The addition of bevacizumab to combination chemotherapy led to an improvement in OS: 17 months for chemotherapy plus bevacizumab versus 13.3 months for chemotherapy alone (HR, 0.71; 98% CI, 0.54–0.95), and extended PFS: 8.2 months for chemotherapy plus bevacizumab versus 5.9 months for chemotherapy alone (HR, 0.67; 95% CI, 0.54–0.82).  The addition of bevacizumab was well tolerated and showed no difference in quality of life between the two groups.   Patients who received bevacizumab were more likely to have grade 3 or higher fistulae (6% vs. 0%), and grade 3 or higher thromboembolic events (8% vs. 1%) compared with patients who received chemotherapy alone.As a result, the addition of bevacizumab may be considered for this patient population. GOG-110: The ifosfamide + cisplatin combination was superior to cisplatin alone in the secondary end point of response rates, but at the cost of increased toxicity. GOG-0179: The cisplatin + topotecan (CT) doublet combination had a significant advantage in overall survival (OS) compared with cisplatin alone, leading to approval of this indication for topotecan by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. However, cisplatin alone underperformed in this trial because as many as 40% of the patients had already received cisplatin up front as a radiosensitizer.[12] GOG-0169: The paclitaxel + cisplatin (PC) combination, similarly, was superior in response rates and progression-free survival (PFS), and its toxicity was similar to that of the single agent except in patients with GOG performance status 2 (scale: 0, asymptomatic–4, totally bedridden).  Therefore, PC was chosen as the reference arm in GOG-0204 (NCT00064077). 1.15 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.79–1.67) for vinorelbine + cisplatin (VC). 1.32 (95% CI, 0.91–1.92) for gemcitabine plus cisplatin. 1.27 (95% CI, 0.90–1.78) for CT. Trend in response rates, PFS, and OS favored CT. Patients in the four study arms experienced different grades of neutropenia, infection, and alopecia.[16] There were no differences in health-related quality of life during treatment.[17] However, there were more neurological side effects for PC. Can a nonplatinum combination show improvement over the standard of cisplatin-paclitaxel in this population, which was previously treated with cisplatin during radiation therapy? Can the addition of bevacizumab improve combination chemotherapy in patients with stages IVB, persistent, or recurrent cervical cancer? Patients were randomly assigned to one of the following four treatment arms: Cisplatin (50 mg/m2) + paclitaxel (135 mg/m2 or 175 mg/m2) on day 1 (PC). PC + bevacizumab (15mg/kg) on day 1. Topotecan (0.75 mg/m2) d1–d3 + paclitaxel (175 mg/m2) on day 1 (PT). PT + bevacizumab (15mg/kg) on day 1. Additional study methods and results included the following: The primary end point was OS, and  452 patients were evaluable. The combination PT was not superior to PC and had  a  HR for death of 1.2 (99% CI, 0.82–1.76).  Previous exposure to platinum did not affect this result. The addition of bevacizumab to combination chemotherapy led to an improvement in OS: 17 months for chemotherapy plus bevacizumab versus 13.3 months for chemotherapy alone (HR, 0.71; 98% CI, 0.54–0.95), and extended PFS: 8.2 months for chemotherapy plus bevacizumab versus 5.9 months for chemotherapy alone (HR, 0.67; 95% CI, 0.54–0.82). The addition of bevacizumab was well tolerated and showed no difference in quality of life between the two groups. Patients who received bevacizumab were more likely to have grade 3 or higher fistulae (6% vs. 0%), and grade 3 or higher thromboembolic events (8% vs. 1%) compared with patients who received chemotherapy alone. As a result, the addition of bevacizumab may be considered for this patient population. Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Alberts DS, Kronmal R, Baker LH, et al.: Phase II randomized trial of cisplatin chemotherapy regimens in the treatment of recurrent or metastatic squamous cell cancer of the cervix: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. J Clin Oncol 5 (11): 1791-5, 1987. [PUBMED Abstract] Thigpen JT, Blessing JA, DiSaia PJ, et al.: A randomized comparison of a rapid versus prolonged (24 hr) infusion of cisplatin in therapy of squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 32 (2): 198-202, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Coleman RE, Harper PG, Gallagher C, et al.: A phase II study of ifosfamide in advanced and relapsed carcinoma of the cervix. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 18 (3): 280-3, 1986. [PUBMED Abstract] Kudelka AP, Winn R, Edwards CL, et al.: Activity of paclitaxel in advanced or recurrent squamous cell cancer of the cervix. Clin Cancer Res 2 (8): 1285-8, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Thigpen T, Vance RB, Khansur T: The platinum compounds and paclitaxel in the management of carcinomas of the endometrium and uterine cervix. Semin Oncol 22 (5 Suppl 12): 67-75, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] McGuire WP, Blessing JA, Moore D, et al.: Paclitaxel has moderate activity in squamous cervix cancer. A Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 14 (3): 792-5, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Buxton EJ, Meanwell CA, Hilton C, et al.: Combination bleomycin, ifosfamide, and cisplatin chemotherapy in cervical cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 81 (5): 359-61, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Omura GA, Blessing JA, Vaccarello L, et al.: Randomized trial of cisplatin versus cisplatin plus mitolactol versus cisplatin plus ifosfamide in advanced squamous carcinoma of the cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 15 (1): 165-71, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Verschraegen CF, Levy T, Kudelka AP, et al.: Phase II study of irinotecan in prior chemotherapy-treated squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. J Clin Oncol 15 (2): 625-31, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Rose PG, Blessing JA, Gershenson DM, et al.: Paclitaxel and cisplatin as first-line therapy in recurrent or advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix: a gynecologic oncology group study. J Clin Oncol 17 (9): 2676-80, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Burnett AF, Roman LD, Garcia AA, et al.: A phase II study of gemcitabine and cisplatin in patients with advanced, persistent, or recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol 76 (1): 63-6, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Long HJ, Bundy BN, Grendys EC, et al.: Randomized phase III trial of cisplatin with or without topotecan in carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology Group Study. J Clin Oncol 23 (21): 4626-33, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Tewari KS, Monk BJ: Gynecologic oncology group trials of chemotherapy for metastatic and recurrent cervical cancer. Curr Oncol Rep 7 (6): 419-34, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Moore DH, Blessing JA, McQuellon RP, et al.: Phase III study of cisplatin with or without paclitaxel in stage IVB, recurrent, or persistent squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 22 (15): 3113-9, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Tewari KS, Monk BJ: Recent achievements and future developments in advanced and recurrent cervical cancer: trials of the Gynecologic Oncology Group. Semin Oncol 36 (2): 170-80, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Monk BJ, Sill MW, McMeekin DS, et al.: Phase III trial of four cisplatin-containing doublet combinations in stage IVB, recurrent, or persistent cervical carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 27 (28): 4649-55, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Cella D, Huang HQ, Monk BJ, et al.: Health-related quality of life outcomes associated with four cisplatin-based doublet chemotherapy regimens for stage IVB recurrent or persistent cervical cancer: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 119 (3): 531-7, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Tewari KS, Sill MW, Long HJ, et al.: Improved survival with bevacizumab in advanced cervical cancer. N Engl J Med 370 (8): 734-43, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Treatment Options for Recurrent Cervical CancerImmunotherapyRadiation therapy and chemotherapyPalliative chemotherapy and other systemic therapyPelvic exenteration Current Clinical Trials Immunotherapy Radiation therapy and chemotherapy Palliative chemotherapy and other systemic therapy Pelvic exenteration With the exception of immunotherapy, which has provided prolonged disease-free survival, other options are unlikely to result in curative outcomes and are mostly applied for palliative purposes. Treatment options for recurrent cervical cancer include the following: Immunotherapy. Radiation therapy and chemotherapy. Palliative chemotherapy and other systemic therapy. Pelvic exenteration. Phase I and phase II clinical trials of new anticancer drugs. Favorable experience with the anti–programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) immune checkpoint inhibitor, pembrolizumab, has led to U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval based on the phase II  KEYNOTE-158 trial (NCT02628067) for women with recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer whose tumors express programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) (combined positive score [CPS], ≥1). KEYNOTE-028 (NCT02054806) was an earlier phase 1b expansion cohort of the anti-PD-1 immune checkpoint inhibitor pembrolizumab that included 24 patients, all but 1 with squamous cell carcinoma.[1] The overall response rate was 17% (95% confidence interval [CI], 5%–37%), with 4 patients achieving a confirmed partial response.Treatment-related adverse events that were  considered to be related to the study drug were observed in 18 patients, with only rash (n = 5; 21%) and pyrexia (n = 4; 17%) occurring in 10% or more of the patients. Grade 3 treatment-related adverse events were experienced by 5 patients and included neutropenia, rash, colitis, Guillain-Barre syndrome, and proteinuria. The phase II findings in the preliminary analysis of 47 patients that led to the FDA approval of pembrolizumab were presented in abstract form;[2] these have been updated in Keytruda’s package insert. KEYNOTE-158 (NCT02628067) was a multicenter, nonrandomized trial that entered 98 patients with recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer who received 200 mg every 3 weeks intravenously until there was unacceptable toxicity or disease progression.[3] A separate analysis was performed in 77 patients whose tumors expressed PD-L1 (CPS ≥1); 92% had squamous histology. The overall response rate among PD-L1–positive patients was 16% (95% CI, 8.8%–25.9%) with 3 complete responses and 10 partial responses; 17 patients were stable. Median progression-free survival  (PFS) was 2.1 months, and overall survival  (OS) was 9.4 months in these marker-positive patients. Treatment-related adverse events were noted in 65% of patients; the most common were hypothyroidism (10.2%), decreased appetite (9.2%), fatigue (9.2%), and diarrhea 8.2%.[3][Level of evidence B4] The experience in a case series of 11 patients that showed 2 patients with  partial responses  and 2 patients with disease stabilization associated with pembrolizumab treatment has been published.[4] In the CheckMate 358 trial (NCT02488759), presented in abstract form, nivolumab (240 mg IV q 2 weeks) was tested in 19 patients with cervical cancer and 5 patients with other virus-associated tumors of vaginal and vulvar origins.[5]One complete and four partial responses were noted among the patients with cervical cancer.The median PFS was 5.5 months. KEYNOTE-826 (NCT03635567) was a multicenter, phase III, randomized trial that included 617 women with persistent, recurrent, or metastatic cervical cancer not previously treated with systemic chemotherapy. Patients had measurable disease. All women were treated with cisplatin or carboplatin combined with paclitaxel, with the option to add bevacizumab. Patients were randomly assigned to receive pembrolizumab or placebo. The dual primary end points were PFS and OS.[6] Final overall results were presented in abstract form.[7]		The OS for all women was 26.4 months for patients who received pembrolizumab and 16.8 months for patients who received placebo (P < .0001), and was also similar in subgroups of women with a PD-L1 CPS of ≥1 or ≥10.[7][Level of evidence A1]After a median follow-up of 39 months, the median PFS for all women was 10.3 months for patients who received pembrolizumab and 8.2 months for patients who received the placebo (P < .0001). The benefit was similar in subgroups of women with a PD-L1 CPS of ≥1 or ≥10.[7]	There was no difference in quality-of-life metrics between the pembrolizumab and placebo groups.[8] The overall response rate was 17% (95% confidence interval [CI], 5%–37%), with 4 patients achieving a confirmed partial response. Treatment-related adverse events that were  considered to be related to the study drug were observed in 18 patients, with only rash (n = 5; 21%) and pyrexia (n = 4; 17%) occurring in 10% or more of the patients. Grade 3 treatment-related adverse events were experienced by 5 patients and included neutropenia, rash, colitis, Guillain-Barre syndrome, and proteinuria. The phase II findings in the preliminary analysis of 47 patients that led to the FDA approval of pembrolizumab were presented in abstract form;[2] these have been updated in Keytruda’s package insert. The overall response rate among PD-L1–positive patients was 16% (95% CI, 8.8%–25.9%) with 3 complete responses and 10 partial responses; 17 patients were stable. Median progression-free survival  (PFS) was 2.1 months, and overall survival  (OS) was 9.4 months in these marker-positive patients. Treatment-related adverse events were noted in 65% of patients; the most common were hypothyroidism (10.2%), decreased appetite (9.2%), fatigue (9.2%), and diarrhea 8.2%.[3][Level of evidence B4] One complete and four partial responses were noted among the patients with cervical cancer. The median PFS was 5.5 months. The OS for all women was 26.4 months for patients who received pembrolizumab and 16.8 months for patients who received placebo (P < .0001), and was also similar in subgroups of women with a PD-L1 CPS of ≥1 or ≥10.[7][Level of evidence A1] After a median follow-up of 39 months, the median PFS for all women was 10.3 months for patients who received pembrolizumab and 8.2 months for patients who received the placebo (P < .0001). The benefit was similar in subgroups of women with a PD-L1 CPS of ≥1 or ≥10.[7] There was no difference in quality-of-life metrics between the pembrolizumab and placebo groups.[8] Radiation therapy and chemotherapy (fluorouracil with or without mitomycin) may cure
40% to 50% of patients with recurrence in the pelvis after initial radical surgery.[9] Chemotherapy can be used for palliation.  Drugs used for palliative chemotherapy are shown in Table 7. Single-agent cisplatin administered intravenously at 50 mg/m² every 3 weeks has been the regimen most often used to treat recurrent cervical cancer since the drug was initially introduced in the 1970s.[10] More recently, the Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG) has reported on sequential randomized trials dealing with combination chemotherapy for stage IVB, recurrent, or persistent cervical cancer.[17,20,22-25] Evidence (cisplatin in combination with other drugs): GOG-110, GOG-0179, GOG-0169 (NCT00803062)GOG-110: The ifosfamide + cisplatin combination was superior to cisplatin alone in the secondary end point of response rates, but at the cost of increased toxicity.GOG-0179: The cisplatin + topotecan (CT) doublet combination had a significant advantage in OS compared with cisplatin alone, leading to approval of this indication for topotecan by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. However, cisplatin alone underperformed in this trial because as many as 40% of the patients had already received cisplatin up front as a radiosensitizer.[20]GOG-0169: The paclitaxel + cisplatin (PC) combination, similarly, was superior in response rates and PFS, and its toxicity was similar to that of the single agent except in patients with GOG performance status 2 (scale: 0, asymptomatic–4, totally bedridden).  Therefore, PC was chosen as the reference arm in GOG-0204 (NCT00064077). GOG-0204 enrolled 513 patients and compared four cisplatin-based doublet regimens.  The trial was closed early because no one experimental arm was likely to significantly lower the hazard ratio of death relative to PC:[25]1.15 (95% CI, 0.79–1.67) for vinorelbine + cisplatin (VC).1.32 (95% CI, 0.91–1.92) for gemcitabine plus cisplatin.1.27 (95% CI, 0.90–1.78) for CT. Trends in response rate, PFS, and OS favored CT.Patients in the four study arms experienced different grades of  neutropenia, infection, and alopecia.[25] There were no differences in health-related quality of life during treatment.[26] However, there were more neurological side effects for PC. GOG-0240 (NCT00803062) was designed to answer the following two questions:[27]Can a nonplatinum combination show improvement over the standard of cisplatin-paclitaxel in this population previously treated with cisplatin during radiation therapy?Can the addition of bevacizumab improve upon combination chemotherapy in patients with stage IVB, persistent, or recurrent cervical cancer?Patients were randomly assigned to the following four treatment arms:Cisplatin (50 mg/m2) + paclitaxel (135 mg/m2 or 175 mg/m2) on day 1 (PC).PC + bevacizumab (15mg/kg) on day 1.Topotecan (0.75 mg/m2) d1–d3 + paclitaxel (175 mg/m2) on day 1 (PT).PT + bevacizumab (15mg/kg) on day 1.Additional study methods and results included the following:The primary end point was OS, and 452 patients were evaluable.  The combination PT was not superior to PC and had  a hazard ratio (HR) for death of 1.2 (99% CI, 0.82–1.76).  Previous exposure to platinum did not affect this result.  The addition of bevacizumab to combination chemotherapy led to an improvement in OS: 17 months for chemotherapy plus bevacizumab versus 13.3 months for chemotherapy alone (HR, 0.71; 98% CI, 0.54–0.95), and extended PFS: 8.2 months for chemotherapy plus bevacizumab versus 5.9 months for chemotherapy alone, HR, 0.67; (95% CI, 0.54–0.82).  The addition of bevacizumab was well tolerated and showed no difference in quality of life between the two groups.   Patients who received bevacizumab were more likely to have grade 3 or higher fistulae (6% vs. 0%) and grade 3 or higher thromboembolic events (8% vs. 1%) compared with patients on chemotherapy alone. As a result, the addition of bevacizumab may be considered for this patient population. GOG-110: The ifosfamide + cisplatin combination was superior to cisplatin alone in the secondary end point of response rates, but at the cost of increased toxicity. GOG-0179: The cisplatin + topotecan (CT) doublet combination had a significant advantage in OS compared with cisplatin alone, leading to approval of this indication for topotecan by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. However, cisplatin alone underperformed in this trial because as many as 40% of the patients had already received cisplatin up front as a radiosensitizer.[20] GOG-0169: The paclitaxel + cisplatin (PC) combination, similarly, was superior in response rates and PFS, and its toxicity was similar to that of the single agent except in patients with GOG performance status 2 (scale: 0, asymptomatic–4, totally bedridden).  Therefore, PC was chosen as the reference arm in GOG-0204 (NCT00064077). 1.15 (95% CI, 0.79–1.67) for vinorelbine + cisplatin (VC). 1.32 (95% CI, 0.91–1.92) for gemcitabine plus cisplatin. 1.27 (95% CI, 0.90–1.78) for CT. Trends in response rate, PFS, and OS favored CT. Patients in the four study arms experienced different grades of  neutropenia, infection, and alopecia.[25] There were no differences in health-related quality of life during treatment.[26] However, there were more neurological side effects for PC. Can a nonplatinum combination show improvement over the standard of cisplatin-paclitaxel in this population previously treated with cisplatin during radiation therapy? Can the addition of bevacizumab improve upon combination chemotherapy in patients with stage IVB, persistent, or recurrent cervical cancer? Patients were randomly assigned to the following four treatment arms: Cisplatin (50 mg/m2) + paclitaxel (135 mg/m2 or 175 mg/m2) on day 1 (PC). PC + bevacizumab (15mg/kg) on day 1. Topotecan (0.75 mg/m2) d1–d3 + paclitaxel (175 mg/m2) on day 1 (PT). PT + bevacizumab (15mg/kg) on day 1. Additional study methods and results included the following: The primary end point was OS, and 452 patients were evaluable. The combination PT was not superior to PC and had  a hazard ratio (HR) for death of 1.2 (99% CI, 0.82–1.76).  Previous exposure to platinum did not affect this result. The addition of bevacizumab to combination chemotherapy led to an improvement in OS: 17 months for chemotherapy plus bevacizumab versus 13.3 months for chemotherapy alone (HR, 0.71; 98% CI, 0.54–0.95), and extended PFS: 8.2 months for chemotherapy plus bevacizumab versus 5.9 months for chemotherapy alone, HR, 0.67; (95% CI, 0.54–0.82). The addition of bevacizumab was well tolerated and showed no difference in quality of life between the two groups. Patients who received bevacizumab were more likely to have grade 3 or higher fistulae (6% vs. 0%) and grade 3 or higher thromboembolic events (8% vs. 1%) compared with patients on chemotherapy alone. As a result, the addition of bevacizumab may be considered for this patient population. No standard treatment is available for patients with  recurrent cervical cancer that has spread
beyond the confines of a radiation or surgical field.   For locally recurrent disease, pelvic exenteration can lead
to a 5-year survival rate of 32% to 62% in selected patients.[28,29] These patients are
appropriate candidates for clinical trials testing drug combinations or new
anticancer agents. Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Frenel JS, Le Tourneau C, O'Neil B, et al.: Safety and Efficacy of Pembrolizumab in Advanced, Programmed Death Ligand 1-Positive Cervical Cancer: Results From the Phase Ib KEYNOTE-028 Trial. J Clin Oncol 35 (36): 4035-4041, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Schellens J, Marabelle A, Zeigenfuss S, et al.: Pembrolizumab for previously treated advanced cervical squamous cell cancer: Preliminary results from the phase 2 KEYNOTE-158 study. [Abstract] J Clin Oncol  35:15, A-5514, 2017. Chung HC, Schellens JHM, Delord JP, et al.: Pembrolizumab treatment of advanced cervical cancer: updated results from the phase 2 KEYNOTE-158 study. [Abstract] J Clin Oncol  36 (Suppl 18): A-5522,  2018. Kranawetter M, Röhrich S, Müllauer L, et al.: Activity of Pembrolizumab in Recurrent Cervical Cancer: Case Series and Review of Published Data. Int J Gynecol Cancer 28 (6): 1196-1202, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Hollebecque A, Meyer T, Moore K: An open-label, multicohort, phase I/II study of nivolumab in patients with virus-associated tumors (CheckMate 358): Efficacy and safety in recurrent or metastatic (R/M) cervical, vaginal, and vulvar cancers. [Abstract] J Clin Oncol  35:15, A-5504, 2017. Colombo N, Dubot C, Lorusso D, et al.: Pembrolizumab for Persistent, Recurrent, or Metastatic Cervical Cancer. N Engl J Med 385 (20): 1856-1867, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Monk BJ, Colombo N, Tewari KS, et al.: KEYNOTE-826: Final overall survival results from a randomized, double-blind, phase 3 study of pembrolizumab + chemotherapy vs placebo + chemotherapy for first-line treatment of persistent, recurrent, or metastatic cervical cancer. [Abstract] J Clin Oncol  41 (Suppl 16): A-5500, 2023. Monk BJ, Tewari KS, Dubot C, et al.: Health-related quality of life with pembrolizumab or placebo plus chemotherapy with or without bevacizumab for persistent, recurrent, or metastatic cervical cancer (KEYNOTE-826): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 24 (4): 392-402, 2023. [PUBMED Abstract] Thomas GM, Dembo AJ, Black B, et al.: Concurrent radiation and chemotherapy for carcinoma of the cervix recurrent after radical surgery. Gynecol Oncol 27 (3): 254-63, 1987. [PUBMED Abstract] Thigpen JT, Blessing JA, DiSaia PJ, et al.: A randomized comparison of a rapid versus prolonged (24 hr) infusion of cisplatin in therapy of squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 32 (2): 198-202, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Coleman RE, Harper PG, Gallagher C, et al.: A phase II study of ifosfamide in advanced and relapsed carcinoma of the cervix. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 18 (3): 280-3, 1986. [PUBMED Abstract] Sutton GP, Blessing JA, McGuire WP, et al.: Phase II trial of ifosfamide and mesna in patients with advanced or recurrent squamous carcinoma of the cervix who had never received chemotherapy: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168 (3 Pt 1): 805-7, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] McGuire WP, Blessing JA, Moore D, et al.: Paclitaxel has moderate activity in squamous cervix cancer. A Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 14 (3): 792-5, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Verschraegen CF, Levy T, Kudelka AP, et al.: Phase II study of irinotecan in prior chemotherapy-treated squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. J Clin Oncol 15 (2): 625-31, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Monk BJ, Sill MW, Burger RA, et al.: Phase II trial of bevacizumab in the treatment of persistent or recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix: a gynecologic oncology group study. J Clin Oncol 27 (7): 1069-74, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Buxton EJ, Meanwell CA, Hilton C, et al.: Combination bleomycin, ifosfamide, and cisplatin chemotherapy in cervical cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 81 (5): 359-61, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Omura GA, Blessing JA, Vaccarello L, et al.: Randomized trial of cisplatin versus cisplatin plus mitolactol versus cisplatin plus ifosfamide in advanced squamous carcinoma of the cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 15 (1): 165-71, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Rose PG, Blessing JA, Gershenson DM, et al.: Paclitaxel and cisplatin as first-line therapy in recurrent or advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix: a gynecologic oncology group study. J Clin Oncol 17 (9): 2676-80, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Burnett AF, Roman LD, Garcia AA, et al.: A phase II study of gemcitabine and cisplatin in patients with advanced, persistent, or recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol 76 (1): 63-6, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Long HJ, Bundy BN, Grendys EC, et al.: Randomized phase III trial of cisplatin with or without topotecan in carcinoma of the uterine cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology Group Study. J Clin Oncol 23 (21): 4626-33, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Morris M, Blessing JA, Monk BJ, et al.: Phase II study of cisplatin and vinorelbine in squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 22 (16): 3340-4, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Tewari KS, Monk BJ: Gynecologic oncology group trials of chemotherapy for metastatic and recurrent cervical cancer. Curr Oncol Rep 7 (6): 419-34, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Moore DH, Blessing JA, McQuellon RP, et al.: Phase III study of cisplatin with or without paclitaxel in stage IVB, recurrent, or persistent squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 22 (15): 3113-9, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Tewari KS, Monk BJ: Recent achievements and future developments in advanced and recurrent cervical cancer: trials of the Gynecologic Oncology Group. Semin Oncol 36 (2): 170-80, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Monk BJ, Sill MW, McMeekin DS, et al.: Phase III trial of four cisplatin-containing doublet combinations in stage IVB, recurrent, or persistent cervical carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. J Clin Oncol 27 (28): 4649-55, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Cella D, Huang HQ, Monk BJ, et al.: Health-related quality of life outcomes associated with four cisplatin-based doublet chemotherapy regimens for stage IVB recurrent or persistent cervical cancer: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 119 (3): 531-7, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Tewari KS, Sill MW, Long HJ, et al.: Improved survival with bevacizumab in advanced cervical cancer. N Engl J Med 370 (8): 734-43, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Alberts DS, Kronmal R, Baker LH, et al.: Phase II randomized trial of cisplatin chemotherapy regimens in the treatment of recurrent or metastatic squamous cell cancer of the cervix: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. J Clin Oncol 5 (11): 1791-5, 1987. [PUBMED Abstract] Tumors of the cervix. In: Morrow CP, Curtin JP: Synopsis of Gynecologic Oncology. 5th ed. Churchill Livingstone, 1998, pp 107-151. Diagnosis Treatment of Stage I Disease Treatment of Stages II, III, and IV Disease Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy During pregnancy, no therapy is warranted for preinvasive lesions of the
cervix, including carcinoma in situ, although expert colposcopy is recommended
to exclude invasive cancer. Treatment of cervical cancer in pregnancy is predicated on the extent of disease and the gestational age at diagnosis.   Patients should undergo biopsy as needed and  imaging  to establish the extent of disease  to make the most informed choices.   The most appropriate imaging modality in pregnancy is magnetic resonance imaging, when indicated. Pregnancy does not alter the course of cervical cancer.  As a result, in certain cases, patients may elect to postpone treatment until its effects on the pregnancy are minimized.  This may be considered for patients with the more common and less aggressive histological subtypes: squamous, adenocarcinoma, and adenosquamous.  Patients with high-risk subtypes, such as small cell or neuroendocrine tumors, should be counseled toward immediate treatment despite the effects on the fetus, given their risk of progression. Patients with early stage (IA) disease may safely undergo fertility-sparing treatments, including cervical conization or radical trachelectomy, as indicated.  The optimal timing for this procedure is in the second trimester, before fetal viability.  Some authors have suggested waiting until the completion of a pregnancy to initiate treatment.[1]  For patients with IA2 and IB disease, such a delay may also be safe, but because of  a risk of lymphatic spread, assessment of lymph-node status should first be ascertained.  The status  is best determined surgically via a laparoscopic or open lymph-node dissection, which can be safely performed up to approximately 20 weeks of pregnancy.[2,3] In patients without lymphatic spread, waiting for fetal viability to initiate treatment is an option.  Patients with positive lymph nodes should be counseled toward immediate treatment. For patients with stage II or greater disease, waiting for fetal viability is generally not acceptable.[4] The standard of care is curative intent chemotherapy and radiation therapy.  This treatment is toxic to the fetus and, without ovarian transposition, will render the ovaries nonfunctional after treatment.  Evacuation of the fetus should be performed before radiation is initiated.  When this is not possible, the radiation will generally cause a spontaneous abortion 3 to 5 weeks after initiating treatment. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy has been offered to patients with locally advanced disease as a way to initiate treatment while maintaining the pregnancy.[1]  Most chemotherapy agents can be initiated safely in the second trimester of pregnancy and beyond;  mild growth restriction of the fetus is the most common side effect. Restriction of growth  has been reported in a relatively small number of patients, and data are lacking on long-term outcomes for these women. As a result, this strategy should be considered with caution.   Most of the patients in the reports underwent standard treatment (either surgery or radiation therapy) after completion of the pregnancy. Morice P, Uzan C, Gouy S, et al.: Gynaecological cancers in pregnancy. Lancet 379 (9815): 558-69, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Alouini S, Rida K, Mathevet P: Cervical cancer complicating pregnancy: implications of laparoscopic lymphadenectomy. Gynecol Oncol 108 (3): 472-7, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Favero G, Chiantera V, Oleszczuk A, et al.: Invasive cervical cancer during pregnancy: laparoscopic nodal evaluation before oncologic treatment delay. Gynecol Oncol 118 (2): 123-7, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Hunter MI, Tewari K, Monk BJ: Cervical neoplasia in pregnancy. Part 2: current treatment of invasive disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199 (1): 10-8, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] The PDQ cancer information summaries are reviewed regularly and updated as new information becomes available.  This section describes the latest changes made to this summary as of the date above. General Information About Cervical Cancer Updated statistics with estimated new cases and deaths for 2024 (cited American Cancer Society as reference 2). This summary is written and maintained by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board, which is
editorially independent of NCI.  The summary reflects an independent review of
the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or NIH.  More
information about summary policies and the role of the PDQ Editorial Boards  in
maintaining the PDQ summaries can be found on the About This PDQ Summary and PDQ® Cancer Information for Health Professionals pages. This PDQ cancer information summary for health professionals provides comprehensive, peer-reviewed, evidence-based information about the treatment of cervical cancer. It is intended as a resource to inform and assist clinicians in the care of their patients.  It does not provide formal guidelines or recommendations for making health care decisions. This summary is reviewed regularly and updated as necessary by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board, which is editorially independent of the National Cancer Institute (NCI).  The summary reflects an independent review of the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Board members review recently published articles each month to determine whether an article should: be discussed at a meeting, be cited with text, or replace or update an existing article that is already cited. Changes to the summaries are made through a consensus process in which Board members evaluate the strength of the evidence in  the published articles and determine how the article should be included in the summary. The lead reviewer for Cervical Cancer Treatment is: Fumiko Chino, MD Any comments or questions about the summary content should be submitted to Cancer.gov through the NCI website's Email Us. Do not contact the individual Board Members with questions or comments about the summaries. Board members will not respond to individual inquiries. Some of the reference citations in this summary are accompanied by a level-of-evidence designation. These designations are intended to help readers assess the strength of the evidence supporting the use of specific interventions or approaches. The PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board uses a formal evidence ranking system in developing its level-of-evidence designations. PDQ is a registered trademark. Although the content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text, it cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless it is presented in its entirety and is regularly updated. However, an author would be permitted to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks succinctly: [include excerpt from the summary].” The preferred citation for this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Adult Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Cervical Cancer Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/cervical/hp/cervical-treatment-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389493] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use within the PDQ summaries only. Permission to use images outside the context of PDQ information must be obtained from the owner(s) and cannot be granted by  the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the illustrations in this summary, along with many other cancer-related images, is available in Visuals Online, a collection of over 2,000 scientific images. Based on the strength of the available evidence, treatment options may be described as either “standard” or “under clinical evaluation.” These classifications should not be used as a basis for insurance reimbursement determinations. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s Email Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NUT Carcinoma - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/pediatric-adult-rare-tumor/rare-tumors/rare-soft-tissue-tumors/nut-carcinoma
txt: NUT carcinoma (NC), also known as NUT midline carcinoma, is a type of rare cancer that can grow anywhere in the body. Usually, it is found in the head, neck, and lungs. NC grows from the squamous cells in the body, which are cells that make up the skin and lining of some organs, like the lungs and stomach. NC grows very quickly and can spread to other parts of the body. NC is so rare that there is little data on how many people have it. People of all ages can develop NC. Symptoms of NC depend on where the cancer is growing in the body. Some general symptoms are: Pain  Unintentional weight loss  Fatigue  Cough  Shortness of breath  Imaging: If you have symptoms of NC, your doctor will use imaging scans such as CT, MRI, and PET to look at where the tumor is and how big it is. They will also check for signs that the tumor has spread to other parts of the body. Biopsy: To check if the tumor is NC your doctor will do a biopsy, taking a small sample from the tumor with a needle. An expert, called a pathologist, will study cells from the sample under the microscope to see what kind of tumor it is. To diagnose NC, a pathologist will test the cells for a type of protein called NUT. This is very important for diagnosing NC. Treatment for each patient will be unique. NC is so rare that there is no standard treatment for it. NC is also difficult to treat because it grows quickly and can become resistant to treatment. You should go to an expert in NC treatment to decide the best approach for your tumor. You can contact MyPART for help finding experts near you. Treatment options to discuss with your doctor include: Surgery: Once NC is diagnosed, you may have surgery to remove the NC. Sometimes surgery is not an option. In this case, your doctor will discuss other options with you. Radiation therapy: Radiation therapy can be used around the time of surgery. The radiation is aimed at the tumor area to prevent the tumor from growing back after it is removed. Chemotherapy: When NC tumors are large, or the cancer cells have spread to other parts of the body, then chemotherapy is used with surgery. No, NC is not known to run in families. We know that in NC, chromosomes (the structures in your cells that contain all your genes) break apart and get put back together in the wrong way. This can cause cells to not function like they should. In NC, a gene called NUT joins with another region, usually a region called BRD4. Doctors will look for this change in chromosomes to confirm that your cancer is NC. The estimate of how a disease will affect you in the long term is called prognosis. Every person is different, and prognosis will depend on many factors, such as: Where the tumor is in your body  If the cancer has spread to other parts of your body  How much of the tumor was taken out during surgery  If you want information on your prognosis, it is important to talk to your doctor. Also, NCI has resources to help you understand cancer prognosis. Doctors estimate NC survival rates by how groups of people with NC have done in the past. Because there are so few NC patients, these rates may not be very accurate. NC is a very aggressive disease, and the average length of survival is approximately 10 months. The 2-year survival rate is 30%.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Dr. Karuna Ganesh is Investigating Mechanisms of Metastasis - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/progress/meet-investigators/karuna-ganesh
txt: Dr. Karuna Ganesh is a medical oncologist at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center who investigates the molecular mechanisms of metastasis. When she was young, Dr. Ganesh became interested in biomedical research when reading a medical thriller novel. In it, a physician-scientist used genomic sequencing to uncover the culprit of a criminal plot. She said, “I was excited by this, knowing someone could conduct science and, at the same time, actively use that knowledge to do something good for humanity.” Later in her career as a physician working with cancer patients, she saw that metastasis (which is the spread of cancer throughout the body) was the leading cause of death in the clinic. In her words, “It felt as though there was an opportunity to understand how metastasis works and make a difference.” Dr. Ganesh’s research has identified a link between cancer metastasis and wound healing in colorectal cancer. “Cancer is a disease of evolution. In response to stressors during metastasis, cancer cells change,” she stated. By corrupting normal mechanisms of tissue regeneration, metastatic cells are able to survive, grow, and spread beyond their site-of-origin. To study the complex processes of metastasis, her lab develops patient-derived organoids, which are miniature 3D tumor models. She explained, “These cultures retain the heterogeneity of tumors and the differences between individual patients.” While each patient is different, studying organoids from numerous individuals makes it possible to identify the shared biological mechanisms and traits between disparate cancer types, a key component of developing viable cancer therapeutics. Along with her scientific research, Dr. Ganesh remarked that one of the greatest challenges and joys since becoming a Principal Investigator has been meeting the needs of trainees. She believes researchers need to understand where trainees are in-terms of experience and adapt their mentoring to facilitate growth and learning. According to her, “Everybody deserves to be challenged, to learn to do science rigorously and ethically, and to have the tools to grow into the best version of themselves.” Dr. Ganesh ultimately aims to improve treatments for patients with metastatic disease through her cancer biology research. From her perspective, “Knowing the genetic and epigenetic requirements for the cell to enter metastatic states will give us the opportunity to impede their reprogramming from a therapeutic standpoint."
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Childhood Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma Treatment (PDQ®) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/pheochromocytoma/hp/child-pheochromocytoma-treatment-pdq
txt:  Incidence  Anatomy  Molecular Characterization of Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma  Genetic Factors and Syndromes Associated With Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma  Correlation Between Clinical and Molecular Features  Clinical Presentation  Diagnostic Evaluation  Special Considerations for the Treatment of Children With Cancer  Treatment of Childhood Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma  Treatment Options Under Clinical Evaluation for Childhood Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma  Latest Updates to This Summary (01/03/2024)  About This PDQ Summary  Pheochromocytoma  and paraganglioma  are rare catecholamine-producing tumors with a combined annual incidence of three cases per 1 million individuals. Paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma are exceedingly rare in the pediatric and adolescent population, accounting for approximately 20% of all cases.[1,2] Barontini M, Levin G, Sanso G: Characteristics of pheochromocytoma in a 4- to 20-year-old population. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1073: 30-7, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] King KS, Prodanov T, Kantorovich V, et al.: Metastatic pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma related to primary tumor development in childhood or adolescence: significant link to SDHB mutations. J Clin Oncol 29 (31): 4137-42, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Tumors arising within the adrenal gland are known as pheochromocytomas, whereas morphologically identical tumors arising elsewhere are termed paragangliomas. Paragangliomas are further divided into the following subtypes:[1,2] Sympathetic paragangliomas that predominantly arise from the intra-abdominal sympathetic trunk and usually produce catecholamines. Parasympathetic paragangliomas that are distributed along the parasympathetic nerves of the head, neck, and mediastinum and are rarely functional. Lenders JW, Eisenhofer G, Mannelli M, et al.: Phaeochromocytoma. Lancet 366 (9486): 665-75, 2005 Aug 20-26. [PUBMED Abstract] Waguespack SG, Rich T, Grubbs E, et al.: A current review of the etiology, diagnosis, and treatment of pediatric pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 95 (5): 2023-37, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Comprehensive molecular profiling of 173 cases of pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas (mean age at diagnosis, 47 years) identified three well-defined molecular subgroups: pseudohypoxia-related clusters 1A and 1B, kinase signaling–related cluster 2, and Wnt signaling–related cluster 3.[1] About 70% of patients with pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma can be assigned to one of these clusters. Each cluster has unique clinical, biochemical, and imaging characteristics that may help guide the treatment and follow-up of patients.[2,3] Cluster 1: These tumors account for about 25% to 35% of paragangliomas and pheochromocytomas, are usually extra-adrenal, and tend to have a noradrenergic biochemical phenotype because these tumors lack the enzyme phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase, which converts norepinephrine to epinephrine.[3,4] Mutations in this cluster stabilize HIF-2 alpha and promote angiogenesis and tumor progression. Patients with tumors in this cluster present at a younger age, especially those with SDHB mutations (<20 years). Patients with cluster 1 tumors develop multiple and recurrent tumors that have the potential for metastatic spread, particularly for patients with SDHA and SDHB mutations. With a median follow-up of 5 years, 3 of 30 asymptomatic children (10%) who were carriers of an SDHB mutation developed abdominal paragangliomas identified on surveillance imaging. Clinically, these patients have sustained hypertension. This cluster can be further subdivided into cluster 1A and 1B, and the genetics involved in these clusters are shown below.[5]Cluster 1A tumors have mutations in the Krebs cycle–associated genes SDHA (AF2), SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, FH, MDH2, IDH1, IDH2, GOT2, SLC25A11, and DLST. Most of these are germline mutations and have a higher metastatic risk.[5]Cluster 1B tumors have mutations in VHL- and EPAS1-related genes such as EGLN2, EGLN1, VHL, EPAS1, and ACO1. About 25% of these are germline mutations.[5] Cluster 2: These tumors usually arise in the adrenal gland and have an adrenergic biochemical phenotype. Cluster 2 tumors affect older patients, with a peak age of 40 years for clinical manifestations. Clinically, they present with an intermittent catecholamine secretion pattern. This cluster includes mutations in tyrosine kinases, including RET, NF1, HRAS, TMEM127, MAX, and FGFR1.[5] Cluster 3: These tumors have somatic mutations of the Wnt signaling pathway, which includes mutations in the CSDE1 gene and MAML3 fusions. These mutations are associated with an aggressive clinical course. Cluster 3 tumors are located mainly in the adrenal gland and account for 5% to 10% of all pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas. They have an intermediate metastatic risk and can secrete normetanephrine and metanephrines. Genomic alterations in this cluster are somatic.[5] Cluster 1A tumors have mutations in the Krebs cycle–associated genes SDHA (AF2), SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, FH, MDH2, IDH1, IDH2, GOT2, SLC25A11, and DLST. Most of these are germline mutations and have a higher metastatic risk.[5] Cluster 1B tumors have mutations in VHL- and EPAS1-related genes such as EGLN2, EGLN1, VHL, EPAS1, and ACO1. About 25% of these are germline mutations.[5] Fishbein L, Leshchiner I, Walter V, et al.: Comprehensive Molecular Characterization of Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma. Cancer Cell 31 (2): 181-193, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Nölting S, Bechmann N, Taieb D, et al.: Personalized Management of Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma. Endocr Rev 43 (2): 199-239, 2022. [PUBMED Abstract] Crona J, Taïeb D, Pacak K: New Perspectives on Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma: Toward a Molecular Classification. Endocr Rev 38 (6): 489-515, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Nölting S, Ullrich M, Pietzsch J, et al.: Current Management of Pheochromocytoma/Paraganglioma: A Guide for the Practicing Clinician in the Era of Precision Medicine. Cancers (Basel) 11 (10): , 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Alrezk R, Suarez A, Tena I, et al.: Update of Pheochromocytoma Syndromes: Genetics, Biochemical Evaluation, and Imaging. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 9: 515, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] It is estimated that up to 30% of all pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas are familial, and several susceptibility genes have been described (see Table 2).  The median age at presentation in most familial syndromes is 30 to 35 years, and up to 50% of patients have the disease by age 26 years.[1-4] Genetic factors and syndromes associated with an increased risk of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma include the following: von Hippel-Lindau  (VHL) disease: Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma occur in 10% to 20% of patients with VHL. For more information, see Von Hippel-Lindau Disease. Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndrome type 2: Codon-specific mutations of the RET gene are associated with a 50% risk of development of pheochromocytoma in MEN2A and MEN2B. Somatic RET mutations are also found in sporadic pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1): Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma are a rare occurrence in patients with NF1, and typically have characteristics similar to those of sporadic tumors, with a relatively late mean age of onset and rarity in pediatrics. Familial pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma syndromes: These syndromes are commonly caused by pathogenic variants in SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD and are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Pathogenic SDHB variants are the most common, followed by SDHD, SDHC, and SDHA. Other genes implicated in this syndrome include SDHAF2, TMEM127, FH, and MAX. Tumors from patients with SDHB and SDHC mutations mainly arise in extra-adrenal locations, whereas tumors from patients with SDHD mutations are mainly found in the head and neck area. SDHA mutations are linked to sympathetic and parasympathetic paragangliomas. For more information, see Table 2.For more information, see the Familial Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma Syndrome section in Genetics of Endocrine and Neuroendocrine Neoplasias. Other syndromes:Carney triad syndrome: This condition includes three tumors: paraganglioma, gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), and pulmonary chondromas. Pheochromocytomas and other lesions, such as esophageal leiomyomas and adrenocortical adenomas, have also been described. The syndrome primarily affects young women, with a mean age of 21 years at time of presentation. Approximately one-half of patients present with paraganglioma or pheochromocytoma, although multiple lesions occur in approximately 20% of the cases. About 20% of patients have all three tumor types; the remainder have two of the three, most commonly GIST and pulmonary chondromas. This triad doesn’t appear to run in families; however, approximately 10% of patients have germline variants in the SDHA, SDHB, or SDHC genes.[5,6]Carney-Stratakis syndrome: Also called Carney dyad syndrome, this condition includes paraganglioma and GIST but not pulmonary chondromas. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner with incomplete penetrance. It is equally common in men and women, with an average age of 23 years at presentation.  Most patients with this syndrome have been found to carry germline mutations in the SDHB, SDHC, or SDHD genes.[6] For more information, see Genetics of Endocrine and Neuroendocrine Neoplasias.Pacak-Zhuang syndrome: This syndrome results from somatic gain-of-function mutations in the  hypoxia-inducible factor 2 alpha (HIF-2 alpha) protein, which is encoded by the EPAS1 gene. This syndrome is characterized by congenital polycythemia, multiple paragangliomas, and duodenal somatostatinomas.[7] One patient with Pacak-Zhuang syndrome was treated with belzutifan, a potent and selective small-molecule inhibitor of the HIF-2 alpha protein. This treatment led to a rapid and sustained tumor response, along with a resolution of hypertension, headaches, and long-standing polycythemia.[8] Tumors from patients with SDHB and SDHC mutations mainly arise in extra-adrenal locations, whereas tumors from patients with SDHD mutations are mainly found in the head and neck area. SDHA mutations are linked to sympathetic and parasympathetic paragangliomas. For more information, see Table 2. For more information, see the Familial Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma Syndrome section in Genetics of Endocrine and Neuroendocrine Neoplasias. Carney triad syndrome: This condition includes three tumors: paraganglioma, gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), and pulmonary chondromas. Pheochromocytomas and other lesions, such as esophageal leiomyomas and adrenocortical adenomas, have also been described. The syndrome primarily affects young women, with a mean age of 21 years at time of presentation. Approximately one-half of patients present with paraganglioma or pheochromocytoma, although multiple lesions occur in approximately 20% of the cases. About 20% of patients have all three tumor types; the remainder have two of the three, most commonly GIST and pulmonary chondromas. This triad doesn’t appear to run in families; however, approximately 10% of patients have germline variants in the SDHA, SDHB, or SDHC genes.[5,6] Carney-Stratakis syndrome: Also called Carney dyad syndrome, this condition includes paraganglioma and GIST but not pulmonary chondromas. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner with incomplete penetrance. It is equally common in men and women, with an average age of 23 years at presentation.  Most patients with this syndrome have been found to carry germline mutations in the SDHB, SDHC, or SDHD genes.[6] For more information, see Genetics of Endocrine and Neuroendocrine Neoplasias. Pacak-Zhuang syndrome: This syndrome results from somatic gain-of-function mutations in the  hypoxia-inducible factor 2 alpha (HIF-2 alpha) protein, which is encoded by the EPAS1 gene. This syndrome is characterized by congenital polycythemia, multiple paragangliomas, and duodenal somatostatinomas.[7] One patient with Pacak-Zhuang syndrome was treated with belzutifan, a potent and selective small-molecule inhibitor of the HIF-2 alpha protein. This treatment led to a rapid and sustained tumor response, along with a resolution of hypertension, headaches, and long-standing polycythemia.[8] Welander J, Söderkvist P, Gimm O: Genetics and clinical characteristics of hereditary pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas. Endocr Relat Cancer 18 (6): R253-76, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Timmers HJ, Gimenez-Roqueplo AP, Mannelli M, et al.: Clinical aspects of SDHx-related pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma. Endocr Relat Cancer 16 (2): 391-400, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Ricketts CJ, Forman JR, Rattenberry E, et al.: Tumor risks and genotype-phenotype-proteotype analysis in 358 patients with germline mutations in SDHB and SDHD. Hum Mutat 31 (1): 41-51, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Burnichon N, Cascón A, Schiavi F, et al.: MAX mutations cause hereditary and sporadic pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma. Clin Cancer Res 18 (10): 2828-37, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Boikos SA, Xekouki P, Fumagalli E, et al.: Carney triad can be (rarely) associated with germline succinate dehydrogenase defects. Eur J Hum Genet 24 (4): 569-73, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Stratakis CA, Carney JA: The triad of paragangliomas, gastric stromal tumours and pulmonary chondromas (Carney triad), and the dyad of paragangliomas and gastric stromal sarcomas (Carney-Stratakis syndrome): molecular genetics and clinical implications. J Intern Med 266 (1): 43-52, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Abdallah A, Pappo A, Reiss U, et al.: Clinical manifestations of Pacak-Zhuang syndrome in a male pediatric patient. Pediatr Blood Cancer 67 (4): e28096, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] Kamihara J, Hamilton KV, Pollard JA, et al.: Belzutifan, a Potent HIF2α Inhibitor, in the Pacak-Zhuang Syndrome. N Engl J Med 385 (22): 2059-2065, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Studies of germline mutations in young patients with pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma have shown that these patients have a higher prevalence (70%–80%) of germline mutations and have further characterized this group of neoplasms, as follows: In a study of 49 patients younger than 20 years  with a paraganglioma or pheochromocytoma, 39 (79%) had an underlying germline mutation that involved the SDHB (n = 27; 55%), SDHD (n = 4; 8%), VHL (n = 6; 12%), or NF1 (n = 2; 4%) gene.[1] The incidence and type of mutation correlated with the site and extent of disease.The germline mutation rates for patients with nonmetastatic disease were lower than those observed in patients who had evidence of metastases (64% vs. 87.5%). Among patients with metastatic disease, the incidence of SDHB mutations was very high (72%), and most presented with disease in the retroperitoneum. Five patients died of their disease.All patients with SDHD mutations had head and neck primary tumors. In another study,  the incidence of germline mutations involving RET, VHL, SDHD, and SDHB in patients with nonsyndromic  paraganglioma was 70% for patients younger than 10 years and 51% among those aged 10 to 20 years.[2] In contrast, only 16% of patients older than 20 years  had an identifiable mutation. It is important to note that these two studies did not include systematic screening for other genes that have been recently described in paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma syndromes, such as KIF1B, EGLN1, TMEM127, SDHA, and MAX (see Table 2). In a retrospective review of 55 patients younger than 21 years referred to the National Cancer Institute, 80% of patients had a germline mutation.[3] Most patients were found to have either the VHL (38%) or the SDHB (25%) mutation. Pheochromocytoma was present in 67% of the patients (37 of 55) and was bilateral in 51% of patients (19 of 37).Most patients with bilateral pheochromocytomas had VHL mutations (79%). Similarly, in a study of 88 children with pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma identified in the German Pediatric Oncology Hematology–Malignant Endocrine Tumor registry, the following was observed:[4]Pathogenic variation screening from 66 patients revealed that 96% of the mutations were confined to the   pseudohypoxia cluster (66% affecting the VHL and EPAS1 genes and 33% affecting the SDHB and SDHD genes). In this analysis, extent of resection was a significant prognostic factor for disease-free survival. A retrospective analysis from the European-American-Pheochromocytoma-Paraganglioma-Registry identified 177 patients with paraganglial tumors who were diagnosed before age 18 years.[5][Level of evidence C1]  Eighty percent of registrants had germline mutations (49% with VHL, 15% with SDHB, 10% with SDHD, 4% with NF1, and one patient each with RET, SDHA, and SDHC).A second primary paraganglial tumor developed in 38% of patients, with increasing frequency over time, reaching 50% at 30 years from initial presentation.Prevalence of second tumors was higher in patients with hereditary disease.  Sixteen patients (9%) with hereditary disease had malignant tumors, ten at initial presentation and another six during follow-up.  Malignancy was associated with SDHB mutations.  Eight patients (5%) died, all of whom had a germline mutation.  Mean life expectancy was 62 years for patients with hereditary disease. A large retrospective review from tertiary medical centers identified 95 of 748 patients whose tumor first presented in childhood.[6]Children showed higher prevalence of hereditary (80.4% vs. 52.6%), extra-adrenal (66.3% vs. 35.1%), multifocal (32.6% vs. 13.5%), metastatic (49.5% vs. 29.1%), and recurrent (29.5% vs. 14.2%) pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma than did adults.Tumors caused by cluster 1 mutations, which are associated with the absence of epinephrine production, were more prevalent among children than adults (76% vs. 39%; P < .0001), and this paralleled a higher prevalence of noradrenergic tumors, characterized by relative lack of increased plasma metanephrine, in children than in adults (93.2% vs. 57.3%). The U.S. National Institutes of Health reported the clinical characteristics and outcomes of 64 pediatric patients who had pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma with SDHB germline mutations.[7]  There were 38 males and 26 females diagnosed at a median age of 13 years.Most patients displayed norepinephrine hypersecretion, and 73% of patients initially presented with a solitary tumor.Metastasis developed in 70% of patients at a median age of 16 years; most patients were diagnosed in the first  2 years after diagnosis and in years 12 to 18 postdiagnosis.The presence of metastasis at the time of diagnosis had a strong negative impact on survival in males but not in females. The estimated 5-year survival rate was 100%; the 10-year survival rate was 97.14%; the 20-year survival rate was 77.71%.These tumors are relatively slow growing, which explains the late deaths and the need for prolonged follow-up.The authors recommended that the initial diagnostic evaluation of SDHB mutation carriers should begin at age 5 to 6 years, with initial work-up focusing on the abdominal region. Thorough monitoring of patients is crucial in the first 2 years after diagnosis, and more frequent follow-up evaluations are needed in years 10 to 20 postdiagnosis because of the increased risk of metastasis. The germline mutation rates for patients with nonmetastatic disease were lower than those observed in patients who had evidence of metastases (64% vs. 87.5%). Among patients with metastatic disease, the incidence of SDHB mutations was very high (72%), and most presented with disease in the retroperitoneum. Five patients died of their disease. All patients with SDHD mutations had head and neck primary tumors. It is important to note that these two studies did not include systematic screening for other genes that have been recently described in paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma syndromes, such as KIF1B, EGLN1, TMEM127, SDHA, and MAX (see Table 2). Most patients were found to have either the VHL (38%) or the SDHB (25%) mutation. Pheochromocytoma was present in 67% of the patients (37 of 55) and was bilateral in 51% of patients (19 of 37). Most patients with bilateral pheochromocytomas had VHL mutations (79%). Pathogenic variation screening from 66 patients revealed that 96% of the mutations were confined to the   pseudohypoxia cluster (66% affecting the VHL and EPAS1 genes and 33% affecting the SDHB and SDHD genes). In this analysis, extent of resection was a significant prognostic factor for disease-free survival. Eighty percent of registrants had germline mutations (49% with VHL, 15% with SDHB, 10% with SDHD, 4% with NF1, and one patient each with RET, SDHA, and SDHC). A second primary paraganglial tumor developed in 38% of patients, with increasing frequency over time, reaching 50% at 30 years from initial presentation. Prevalence of second tumors was higher in patients with hereditary disease.  Sixteen patients (9%) with hereditary disease had malignant tumors, ten at initial presentation and another six during follow-up.  Malignancy was associated with SDHB mutations.  Eight patients (5%) died, all of whom had a germline mutation.  Mean life expectancy was 62 years for patients with hereditary disease. Children showed higher prevalence of hereditary (80.4% vs. 52.6%), extra-adrenal (66.3% vs. 35.1%), multifocal (32.6% vs. 13.5%), metastatic (49.5% vs. 29.1%), and recurrent (29.5% vs. 14.2%) pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma than did adults. Tumors caused by cluster 1 mutations, which are associated with the absence of epinephrine production, were more prevalent among children than adults (76% vs. 39%; P < .0001), and this paralleled a higher prevalence of noradrenergic tumors, characterized by relative lack of increased plasma metanephrine, in children than in adults (93.2% vs. 57.3%). There were 38 males and 26 females diagnosed at a median age of 13 years. Most patients displayed norepinephrine hypersecretion, and 73% of patients initially presented with a solitary tumor. Metastasis developed in 70% of patients at a median age of 16 years; most patients were diagnosed in the first  2 years after diagnosis and in years 12 to 18 postdiagnosis. The presence of metastasis at the time of diagnosis had a strong negative impact on survival in males but not in females. The estimated 5-year survival rate was 100%; the 10-year survival rate was 97.14%; the 20-year survival rate was 77.71%. These tumors are relatively slow growing, which explains the late deaths and the need for prolonged follow-up. The authors recommended that the initial diagnostic evaluation of SDHB mutation carriers should begin at age 5 to 6 years, with initial work-up focusing on the abdominal region. Thorough monitoring of patients is crucial in the first 2 years after diagnosis, and more frequent follow-up evaluations are needed in years 10 to 20 postdiagnosis because of the increased risk of metastasis. Immunohistochemical SDHB staining may help triage genetic testing. Tumors of patients with SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD mutations have absent or weak staining, while sporadic tumors and those associated with other constitutional syndromes have positive staining.[8,9] Therefore, immunohistochemical SDHB staining can help identify potential carriers of a SDH mutation early, obviating the need for extensive and costly testing of other genes. Early identification of young patients with SDHB mutations using radiographic, serological, and immunohistochemical markers could potentially decrease mortality and identify other family members who carry a germline SDHB mutation. Given the higher prevalence of germline alterations in children and adolescents with pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma, genetic counseling and testing should be considered in this younger population. King KS, Prodanov T, Kantorovich V, et al.: Metastatic pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma related to primary tumor development in childhood or adolescence: significant link to SDHB mutations. J Clin Oncol 29 (31): 4137-42, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Neumann HP, Bausch B, McWhinney SR, et al.: Germ-line mutations in nonsyndromic pheochromocytoma. N Engl J Med 346 (19): 1459-66, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Babic B, Patel D, Aufforth R, et al.: Pediatric patients with pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma should have routine preoperative genetic testing for common susceptibility genes in addition to imaging to detect extra-adrenal and metastatic tumors. Surgery 161 (1): 220-227, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Redlich A, Pamporaki C, Lessel L, et al.: Pseudohypoxic pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas dominate in children. Pediatr Blood Cancer 68 (7): e28981, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Bausch B, Wellner U, Bausch D, et al.: Long-term prognosis of patients with pediatric pheochromocytoma. Endocr Relat Cancer 21 (1): 17-25, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Pamporaki C, Hamplova B, Peitzsch M, et al.: Characteristics of Pediatric vs Adult Pheochromocytomas and Paragangliomas. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 102 (4): 1122-1132, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Jochmanova I, Abcede AMT, Guerrero RJS, et al.: Clinical characteristics and outcomes of SDHB-related pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma in children and adolescents. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 146 (4): 1051-1063, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] Gill AJ, Benn DE, Chou A, et al.: Immunohistochemistry for SDHB triages genetic testing of SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD in paraganglioma-pheochromocytoma syndromes. Hum Pathol 41 (6): 805-14, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] van Nederveen FH, Gaal J, Favier J, et al.: An immunohistochemical procedure to detect patients with paraganglioma and phaeochromocytoma with germline SDHB, SDHC, or SDHD gene mutations: a retrospective and prospective analysis. Lancet Oncol 10 (8): 764-71, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Patients with pheochromocytoma and sympathetic extra-adrenal paraganglioma usually present with the following symptoms of excess catecholamine production: Hypertension. Headache. Perspiration. Palpitations. Tremor. Facial pallor. In one study, 2,291 adult patients were evaluated for the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma. Patients were tested because of initial signs or symptoms, detection of an incidental mass on imaging or during routine surveillance because of a previous history of pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma, or a hereditary risk associated with a mutation of a tumor susceptibility gene. The study used a 7-point clinical scoring system that included pallor, hyperhidrosis, palpitations, tremor, nausea, body mass index of less than 25 kg/m2, and heart rate of 85 beats per minute or higher to identify patients at risk of having pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma. A score of 3 or higher was associated with a  5.8-fold higher likelihood of being diagnosed with a paraganglioma or a pheochromocytoma,  compared with patients who had a lower score.[1] This scoring system may not be applicable to pediatric patients. Symptoms of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma can be paroxysmal, although sustained hypertension between paroxysmal episodes occurs in more than one-half of patients. These symptoms can also be induced by exertion, trauma, induction of anesthesia, resection of the tumor, consumption of foods high in tyramine (e.g., red wine, chocolate, cheese), or urination (in cases of primary tumor of the bladder).[2] Parasympathetic extra-adrenal paragangliomas do not secrete catecholamines and usually present as a neck mass with symptoms related to compression, but also may be asymptomatic and diagnosed incidentally.[2] Epinephrine production is also associated with cluster genotype. Cluster 1 tumors are characterized by absence of epinephrine production (noradrenergic phenotype), whereas cluster 2 tumors produce epinephrine (adrenergic phenotype).[3] The pediatric and adolescent patient appears to present with symptoms similar to those of the adult patient, although with a more frequent occurrence of sustained hypertension.[4]  The clinical behavior of paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma appears to be more aggressive in children and adolescents, and metastatic rates of up to 50% have been reported.[4-6] As previously discussed, children and adolescents with pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma have a higher prevalence of hereditary, extra-adrenal, multifocal, metastatic, and recurrent pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas. They also have a higher prevalence of cluster 1 mutations, which is paralleled by a higher prevalence of noradrenergic tumors than in adults.[3] Geroula A, Deutschbein T, Langton K, et al.: Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma: clinical feature-based disease probability in relation to catecholamine biochemistry and reason for disease suspicion. Eur J Endocrinol 181 (4): 409-420, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Lenders JW, Eisenhofer G, Mannelli M, et al.: Phaeochromocytoma. Lancet 366 (9486): 665-75, 2005 Aug 20-26. [PUBMED Abstract] Pamporaki C, Hamplova B, Peitzsch M, et al.: Characteristics of Pediatric vs Adult Pheochromocytomas and Paragangliomas. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 102 (4): 1122-1132, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Pham TH, Moir C, Thompson GB, et al.: Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma in children: a review of medical and surgical management at a tertiary care center. Pediatrics 118 (3): 1109-17, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Waguespack SG, Rich T, Grubbs E, et al.: A current review of the etiology, diagnosis, and treatment of pediatric pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 95 (5): 2023-37, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] King KS, Prodanov T, Kantorovich V, et al.: Metastatic pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma related to primary tumor development in childhood or adolescence: significant link to SDHB mutations. J Clin Oncol 29 (31): 4137-42, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] The diagnosis of paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma relies on the biochemical documentation of excess catecholamine secretion coupled with imaging studies for localization and staging: Biochemical testing: Measurement of plasma-free fractionated metanephrines (metanephrine and normetanephrine) is usually the diagnostic tool of choice when a secreting paraganglioma or pheochromocytoma is suspected. A 24-hour urine collection for catecholamines (epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine) and fractionated metanephrines can also be performed for confirmation.[1,2]Catecholamine metabolic and secretory profiles are impacted by hereditary background; both hereditary and sporadic paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma differ markedly in tumor contents of catecholamines and corresponding plasma and urinary hormonal profiles. About 50% of secreting tumors produce and contain a mixture of norepinephrine and epinephrine, while most of the rest produce norepinephrine almost exclusively, with occasional rare tumors producing mainly dopamine. Patients with epinephrine-producing tumors are diagnosed later (median age, 50 years) than those with tumors lacking appreciable epinephrine production (median age, 40 years). Patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) and neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) syndromes, all with epinephrine-producing tumors, are typically diagnosed at a later age (median age, 40 years) than are patients with tumors that lack appreciable epinephrine production secondary to mutations of VHL and SDH (median age, 30 years). These variations in ages at diagnosis associated with different tumor catecholamine phenotypes and locations suggest origins of paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma for different progenitor cells with variable susceptibility to disease-causing mutations.[3,4] Imaging: Imaging modalities used for the localization of paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma include the following:Computed tomography (CT).Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).Iodine I 123 or iodine I 131-labeled metaiodobenzylguanidine (123/131I-MIBG) scintigraphy, fluorine F 18-fluorodihydroxyphenylalanine (18F-FDOPA) positron emission tomography (PET)-CT, gallium Ga 68-DOTATATE (68Ga-DOTATATE) PET-CT, and fluorine F 18-6-fluorodopamine (18F-6-FDA) PET.[5,6]For tumor localization, 18F-6-FDA PET and 123/131I-MIBG scintigraphy perform equally well in patients with nonmetastatic paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma, but metastases are better detected by 18F-6-FDA PET than by 123/131I-MIBG.[7,8] For patients with cluster 1A tumors, the most sensitive modality is 68Ga-DOTATATE PET-CT. For patients with cluster 1B tumors, 18F-FDOPA PET is preferred. Cluster 2 tumors are usually identified using CT or MRI, and the most sensitive functional imaging method is 18F-FDOPA PET.[9] Other functional imaging alternatives include indium In 111-octreotide scintigraphy and fluorine F 18-fludeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) PET, both of which can be coupled with CT imaging for improved anatomic detail.A single-institution retrospective evaluation of consecutive pediatric patients with pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma (aged, ≤20 years) compared functional imaging with 131I-MIBG, 18F-FDG PET-CT, and 68Ga-DOTATATE PET-CT.[10]  In a cohort of 32 patients (16 males; age at diagnosis, 16.4 ± 2.68 years), lesion-wise sensitivity of 68Ga-DOTATATE PET-CT (95%) was higher than that of both 18F-FDG PET-CT (80%, P = .027) and 131I-MIBG (65%, P = .0004) for overall lesions. Lesion-wide sensitivity of 68Ga-DOTATATE PET-CT was also higher than that of 18F-FDG PET-CT (100% vs. 67%, P = .017) for primary paraganglioma and that of 131I-MIBG (93% vs. 42%, P = .0001) for metastases. Catecholamine metabolic and secretory profiles are impacted by hereditary background; both hereditary and sporadic paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma differ markedly in tumor contents of catecholamines and corresponding plasma and urinary hormonal profiles. About 50% of secreting tumors produce and contain a mixture of norepinephrine and epinephrine, while most of the rest produce norepinephrine almost exclusively, with occasional rare tumors producing mainly dopamine. Patients with epinephrine-producing tumors are diagnosed later (median age, 50 years) than those with tumors lacking appreciable epinephrine production (median age, 40 years). Patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) and neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) syndromes, all with epinephrine-producing tumors, are typically diagnosed at a later age (median age, 40 years) than are patients with tumors that lack appreciable epinephrine production secondary to mutations of VHL and SDH (median age, 30 years). These variations in ages at diagnosis associated with different tumor catecholamine phenotypes and locations suggest origins of paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma for different progenitor cells with variable susceptibility to disease-causing mutations.[3,4] Computed tomography (CT). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Iodine I 123 or iodine I 131-labeled metaiodobenzylguanidine (123/131I-MIBG) scintigraphy, fluorine F 18-fluorodihydroxyphenylalanine (18F-FDOPA) positron emission tomography (PET)-CT, gallium Ga 68-DOTATATE (68Ga-DOTATATE) PET-CT, and fluorine F 18-6-fluorodopamine (18F-6-FDA) PET.[5,6] For tumor localization, 18F-6-FDA PET and 123/131I-MIBG scintigraphy perform equally well in patients with nonmetastatic paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma, but metastases are better detected by 18F-6-FDA PET than by 123/131I-MIBG.[7,8] For patients with cluster 1A tumors, the most sensitive modality is 68Ga-DOTATATE PET-CT. For patients with cluster 1B tumors, 18F-FDOPA PET is preferred. Cluster 2 tumors are usually identified using CT or MRI, and the most sensitive functional imaging method is 18F-FDOPA PET.[9] Other functional imaging alternatives include indium In 111-octreotide scintigraphy and fluorine F 18-fludeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) PET, both of which can be coupled with CT imaging for improved anatomic detail. A single-institution retrospective evaluation of consecutive pediatric patients with pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma (aged, ≤20 years) compared functional imaging with 131I-MIBG, 18F-FDG PET-CT, and 68Ga-DOTATATE PET-CT.[10]  In a cohort of 32 patients (16 males; age at diagnosis, 16.4 ± 2.68 years), lesion-wise sensitivity of 68Ga-DOTATATE PET-CT (95%) was higher than that of both 18F-FDG PET-CT (80%, P = .027) and 131I-MIBG (65%, P = .0004) for overall lesions. Lesion-wide sensitivity of 68Ga-DOTATATE PET-CT was also higher than that of 18F-FDG PET-CT (100% vs. 67%, P = .017) for primary paraganglioma and that of 131I-MIBG (93% vs. 42%, P = .0001) for metastases. Lenders JW, Pacak K, Walther MM, et al.: Biochemical diagnosis of pheochromocytoma: which test is best? JAMA 287 (11): 1427-34, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Sarathi V, Pandit R, Patil VK, et al.: Performance of plasma fractionated free metanephrines by enzyme immunoassay in the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma in children. Endocr Pract 18 (5): 694-9, 2012 Sep-Oct. [PUBMED Abstract] Eisenhofer G, Pacak K, Huynh TT, et al.: Catecholamine metabolomic and secretory phenotypes in phaeochromocytoma. Endocr Relat Cancer 18 (1): 97-111, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Eisenhofer G, Timmers HJ, Lenders JW, et al.: Age at diagnosis of pheochromocytoma differs according to catecholamine phenotype and tumor location. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 96 (2): 375-84, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Taïeb D, Neumann H, Rubello D, et al.: Modern nuclear imaging for paragangliomas: beyond SPECT. J Nucl Med 53 (2): 264-74, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Janssen I, Blanchet EM, Adams K, et al.: Superiority of [68Ga]-DOTATATE PET/CT to Other Functional Imaging Modalities in the Localization of SDHB-Associated Metastatic Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma. Clin Cancer Res 21 (17): 3888-95, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Timmers HJ, Chen CC, Carrasquillo JA, et al.: Comparison of 18F-fluoro-L-DOPA, 18F-fluoro-deoxyglucose, and 18F-fluorodopamine PET and 123I-MIBG scintigraphy in the localization of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 94 (12): 4757-67, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Sait S, Pandit-Taskar N, Modak S: Failure of MIBG scan to detect metastases in SDHB-mutated pediatric metastatic pheochromocytoma. Pediatr Blood Cancer 64 (11): , 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Nölting S, Bechmann N, Taieb D, et al.: Personalized Management of Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma. Endocr Rev 43 (2): 199-239, 2022. [PUBMED Abstract] Jaiswal SK, Sarathi V, Malhotra G, et al.: The utility of 68Ga-DOTATATE PET/CT in localizing primary/metastatic pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma in children and adolescents - a single-center experience. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 34 (1): 109-119, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Cancer in children and adolescents is rare, although the overall incidence has been slowly increasing since 1975.[1]    Referral to medical centers with multidisciplinary teams of cancer specialists experienced in treating cancers that occur in childhood and adolescence should be considered. This multidisciplinary team approach incorporates the skills
of the following health care professionals and others to ensure that children receive treatment, supportive care, and rehabilitation
that will achieve optimal survival and quality of life: Primary care physicians. Pediatric surgeons. Radiation
oncologists. Pediatric medical oncologists/hematologists. Rehabilitation
specialists. Pediatric nurse specialists. Social workers. Child-life professionals. Psychologists. For specific information about supportive care for children and adolescents with cancer, see the summaries on Supportive and Palliative Care. The American Academy of Pediatrics has outlined guidelines for
pediatric cancer centers and their role in the treatment of pediatric patients
with cancer.[2]  At
these pediatric cancer centers, clinical trials are available for most  types of cancer that occur in children and adolescents, and the opportunity
to participate is offered to most patients and their families.  Clinical
trials for children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer are generally
designed to compare potentially better therapy with current standard therapy.  Most of the progress made in identifying curative
therapy for childhood cancers has been achieved through clinical trials.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Dramatic improvements in survival have been achieved for children and adolescents with cancer. Between 1975 and 2010, childhood cancer mortality decreased by more than 50%.[3]  Childhood and adolescent cancer survivors require close monitoring because side effects of cancer therapy may persist or develop months or years after treatment.  For specific information about the incidence, type, and monitoring of late effects in childhood and adolescent cancer survivors, see Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. Childhood cancer is a rare disease, with about 15,000 cases diagnosed annually in the United States in individuals younger than 20 years.[4] The U.S. Rare Diseases Act of 2002 defines a rare disease as one that affects populations smaller than 200,000 people. Therefore, all pediatric cancers are considered rare. The designation of a rare tumor is not uniform among pediatric and adult groups. In adults, rare cancers are defined as those with an annual incidence of fewer than six cases per 100,000 people. They account for up to 24% of all cancers diagnosed in the European Union and about 20% of all cancers diagnosed in the United States.[5,6] Also, the designation of a pediatric rare tumor is not uniform among international groups, as follows: A consensus effort between the European Union Joint Action on Rare Cancers and the European Cooperative Study Group for Rare Pediatric Cancers estimated that 11% of all cancers in patients younger than 20 years could be categorized as very rare. This consensus group defined very rare cancers as those with annual incidences of fewer than 2 cases per 1 million people. However, three additional histologies (thyroid carcinoma, melanoma, and testicular cancer) with incidences of more than 2 cases per 1 million people were also included  in the very rare group because there is a lack of knowledge and expertise in the management of these tumors.[7] The Children's Oncology Group defines rare pediatric cancers as those listed in the International Classification of Childhood Cancer subgroup XI, which includes thyroid cancer, melanoma and nonmelanoma skin cancers, and multiple types of carcinomas (e.g., adrenocortical carcinoma, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and most adult-type carcinomas such as breast cancer, colorectal cancer, etc.).[8]  These diagnoses account for about 4% of cancers diagnosed in children aged 0 to 14 years, compared with about 20% of cancers diagnosed in adolescents aged 15 to 19 years.[9]Most cancers in subgroup XI are either melanomas or thyroid cancer, with other types accounting for only 1.3% of cancers in children aged 0 to 14 years and 5.3% of cancers in adolescents aged 15 to 19 years. Most cancers in subgroup XI are either melanomas or thyroid cancer, with other types accounting for only 1.3% of cancers in children aged 0 to 14 years and 5.3% of cancers in adolescents aged 15 to 19 years. These rare cancers are extremely challenging to study because of the low number of patients with any individual diagnosis, the predominance of rare cancers in the adolescent population, and the lack of clinical trials for adolescents with rare cancers. Information about these tumors may also be found in sources relevant to
adults with cancer, such as Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma Treatment. Smith MA, Seibel NL, Altekruse SF, et al.: Outcomes for children and adolescents with cancer: challenges for the twenty-first century. J Clin Oncol 28 (15): 2625-34, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] American Academy of Pediatrics: Standards for pediatric cancer centers. Pediatrics  134 (2): 410-4, 2014. Also available online. Last accessed December 15, 2023. Smith MA, Altekruse SF, Adamson PC, et al.: Declining childhood and adolescent cancer mortality. Cancer 120 (16): 2497-506, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Ward E, DeSantis C, Robbins A, et al.: Childhood and adolescent cancer statistics, 2014. CA Cancer J Clin 64 (2): 83-103, 2014 Mar-Apr. [PUBMED Abstract] Gatta G, Capocaccia R, Botta L, et al.: Burden and centralised treatment in Europe of rare tumours: results of RARECAREnet-a population-based study. Lancet Oncol 18 (8): 1022-1039, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] DeSantis CE, Kramer JL, Jemal A: The burden of rare cancers in the United States. CA Cancer J Clin 67 (4): 261-272, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Ferrari A, Brecht IB, Gatta G, et al.: Defining and listing very rare cancers of paediatric age: consensus of the Joint Action on Rare Cancers in cooperation with the European Cooperative Study Group for Pediatric Rare Tumors. Eur J Cancer 110: 120-126, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Pappo AS, Krailo M, Chen Z, et al.: Infrequent tumor initiative of the Children's Oncology Group: initial lessons learned and their impact on future plans. J Clin Oncol 28 (33): 5011-6, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al., eds.: SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975-2012. National Cancer Institute, 2015. Also available online. Last accessed May 25, 2022. Treatment options for childhood paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma include the following: Surgery. Chemotherapy for patients with metastatic disease. High-dose iodine I 131-labeled metaiodobenzylguanidine (131I-MIBG). Lutetium Lu 177-DOTATATE and Yttrium Y 90-DOTATOC.[1] Tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy (sunitinib and cabozantinib).[1] mTOR inhibitors.[1] Immunotherapy.[1] Treatment of paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma is surgical. For secreting tumors, alpha- and beta-adrenergic blockade must be optimized before surgery. A single-institutional study reviewed the experience of  laparoscopic partial adrenalectomy for bilateral pheochromocytoma in patients with von Hippel-Lindau disease.[2]  In eight patients, all 16 adrenalectomies were performed laparoscopically. Fourteen of the procedures were partial adrenalectomies, and two patients required a contralateral total adrenalectomy because of tumor size and diffuse multinodularity.  Two patients had new ipsilateral tumors identified after a median follow-up of 5 years (range, 4–6 years), with one patient who underwent repeat partial adrenalectomy. There were no mortalities in the study period. For patients with metastatic disease, responses have been documented to some chemotherapeutic regimens such as gemcitabine and docetaxel or different combinations of vincristine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and dacarbazine.[3-5] Chemotherapy may help alleviate symptoms and facilitate surgery, although its impact on overall survival is less clear. Responses have also been obtained to high-dose 131I-MIBG and sunitinib.[6,7] Granberg D, Juhlin CC, Falhammar H: Metastatic Pheochromocytomas and Abdominal Paragangliomas. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 106 (5): e1937-e1952, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Rubalcava NS, Overman RE, Kartal TT, et al.: Laparoscopic adrenal-sparing approach for children with bilateral pheochromocytoma in Von Hippel-Lindau disease. J Pediatr Surg 57 (3): 414-417, 2022. [PUBMED Abstract] Mora J, Cruz O, Parareda A, et al.: Treatment of disseminated paraganglioma with gemcitabine and docetaxel. Pediatr Blood Cancer 53 (4): 663-5, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Huang H, Abraham J, Hung E, et al.: Treatment of malignant pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma with cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and dacarbazine: recommendation from a 22-year follow-up of 18 patients. Cancer 113 (8): 2020-8, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Patel SR, Winchester DJ, Benjamin RS: A 15-year experience with chemotherapy of patients with paraganglioma. Cancer 76 (8): 1476-80, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Gonias S, Goldsby R, Matthay KK, et al.: Phase II study of high-dose [131I]metaiodobenzylguanidine therapy for patients with metastatic pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma. J Clin Oncol 27 (25): 4162-8, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Joshua AM, Ezzat S, Asa SL, et al.: Rationale and evidence for sunitinib in the treatment of malignant paraganglioma/pheochromocytoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 94 (1): 5-9, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Information about National Cancer Institute (NCI)–supported clinical trials can be found on the NCI website. For information about clinical trials sponsored by other organizations, see the ClinicalTrials.gov website. The following are examples of national and/or institutional clinical trials that are currently being conducted: NCT01163383 (Iodine I 131-labeled metaiodobenzylguanidine [131I-MIBG] Therapy for Refractory Neuroblastoma and Metastatic Paraganglioma/Pheochromocytoma): MIBG is a substance that is taken up by neuroblastoma or pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma tumor cells. MIBG is combined with radioactive iodine (131I) in the laboratory to form a radioactive compound, 131I-MIBG. This radioactive compound delivers radiation specifically to the cancer cells, causing them to die.

The purpose of this research protocol is to provide a mechanism to deliver MIBG therapy when clinically indicated, but also to provide a mechanism to continue to collect efficacy and toxicity data that will be provided. NCT04924075 (Belzutifan/MK-6482 for the Treatment of Advanced Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma or Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumor): This study will evaluate the efficacy and safety of belzutifan monotherapy in participants with advanced pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma or pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor. The primary goal is to evaluate the objective response rate  of belzutifan per Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors Version 1.1 by blinded independent central review. The PDQ cancer information summaries are reviewed regularly and updated as new information becomes available. This section describes the latest changes made to this summary as of the date above. Editorial changes were made to this summary. This summary is written and maintained by the PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board, which is
editorially independent of NCI.  The summary reflects an independent review of
the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or NIH.  More
information about summary policies and the role of the PDQ Editorial Boards  in
maintaining the PDQ summaries can be found on the About This PDQ Summary and PDQ® Cancer Information for Health Professionals pages. This PDQ cancer information summary for health professionals provides comprehensive, peer-reviewed, evidence-based information about the treatment of pediatric pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma. It is intended as a resource to inform and assist clinicians in the care of their patients.  It does not provide formal guidelines or recommendations for making health care decisions. This summary is reviewed regularly and updated as necessary by the PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board, which is editorially independent of the National Cancer Institute (NCI).  The summary reflects an independent review of the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Board members review recently published articles each month to determine whether an article should: be discussed at a meeting, be cited with text, or replace or update an existing article that is already cited. Changes to the summaries are made through a consensus process in which Board members evaluate the strength of the evidence in  the published articles and determine how the article should be included in the summary. The lead reviewers for Childhood Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma Treatment are: Denise Adams, MD (Children's Hospital Boston) Karen J. Marcus, MD, FACR (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Boston Children's Hospital) William H. Meyer, MD Paul A. Meyers, MD (Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center) Thomas A. Olson, MD (Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center of Children's Healthcare of Atlanta - Egleston Campus) Alberto S. Pappo, MD (St. Jude Children's Research Hospital) D. Williams Parsons, MD, PhD (Texas Children's Hospital) Arthur Kim Ritchey, MD (Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC) Carlos Rodriguez-Galindo, MD (St. Jude Children's Research Hospital) Stephen J. Shochat, MD (St. Jude Children's Research Hospital) Any comments or questions about the summary content should be submitted to Cancer.gov through the NCI website's Email Us. Do not contact the individual Board Members with questions or comments about the summaries. Board members will not respond to individual inquiries. Some of the reference citations in this summary are accompanied by a level-of-evidence designation. These designations are intended to help readers assess the strength of the evidence supporting the use of specific interventions or approaches. The PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board uses a formal evidence ranking system in developing its level-of-evidence designations. PDQ is a registered trademark. Although the content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text, it cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless it is presented in its entirety and is regularly updated. However, an author would be permitted to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks succinctly: [include excerpt from the summary].” The preferred citation for this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Childhood Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/pheochromocytoma/hp/child-pheochromocytoma-treatment-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 31909942] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use within the PDQ summaries only. Permission to use images outside the context of PDQ information must be obtained from the owner(s) and cannot be granted by  the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the illustrations in this summary, along with many other cancer-related images, is available in Visuals Online, a collection of over 2,000 scientific images. Based on the strength of the available evidence, treatment options may be described as either “standard” or “under clinical evaluation.” These classifications should not be used as a basis for insurance reimbursement determinations. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s Email Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Advanced Melanoma Facebook Live Event - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/skin/melanoma-facebook-live
txt: Advanced Melanoma Research and Treatment Facebook Live
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NCI K12 Award - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/grants-training/training/funding/k12
txt: Do you have questions about your NCI application or award for training in cancer research or education? Make the NCI Frequently Asked Questions your first stop to getting answers! To stay up to date on Funding for Cancer Training news, subscribe to the Cancer Training Branch Newsletter! The purpose of the Paul Calabresi Career Development Award for Clinical Oncology (PCACO) K12 is to increase the number of clinicians (M.D.s, D.O.s, Pharm.D.s, nurses with Ph.D.s or equivalent) trained in clinical and translational cancer research, and to promote their career development as cancer researchers. The NCI K12 allows appointment of Scholars proposing to serve as the lead investigator of an independent clinical trial; or proposing a separate ancillary clinical trial to an existing trial; or proposing to gain research experience in a clinical trial led by another investigator, as part of their research and career development.  The PCACO is not intended to train scientists for laboratory-based research.  The PCACO provides up to 5 years of support and is renewable. Note: The details on this page are for informational purposes only. Please read and follow all requirements and instructions in the notice of funding opportunity (NOFO) and the Table of IC-Specific Information linked therein before applying for an award. Application review information is described in the funding opportunity. If you have any questions before submitting your application, please contact the relevant NCI program staff listed at the end of this page. For more complete information, reference the Program Announcement PAR-22-136 (K12 Clinical Trial Optional) and/or contact the program staff. At the time of the award, the PI must be: a citizen of the United States  or a non-citizen national  or must have been lawfully admitted to the United States for permanent residence (i.e., in possession of a currently valid Alien Registration Receipt Card (1-151 or 1-551), or other legal verification of such status).  Established Investigators (Associate and Full Professors) Expected to have ongoing R01 and/or R01-like cancer- focused grant support (for the K12 Program, R01 and/or R01-like awards are grants or contracts of at least 3 years and $150,000 a year in direct costs, including those supporting clinical trials)  Researchers from diverse backgrounds are encouraged to participate as mentors. Expected to have independent R01 and/or R01-like cancer-related research support (for the K12 Program, R01 and/or R01-like awards are grants or contracts of at least 3 years and $150,000 a year in direct costs, including those supporting clinical trials)  At the time of the award, the scholar must be: a citizen of the United States  or a noncitizen national  or must have been lawfully admitted to the United States for permanent residence (i.e., in possession of a currently valid Alien Registration Receipt Card (1-151 or 1-551), or other legal verification of such status).  Clinician-scientist Scholars must be: Physicians holding M.D. or D.O. degrees (including those in residency training)  Pharm.D. recipients  Nurses with a Ph.D. or equivalent degree  Scholars still in residency training are not eligible.  Scholars must commit a minimum of 9 calendar months (75% of full-time professional effort) to research and career development. NCI will allow surgeon-scientists with active surgical duties to request less than 9 person-months (75%) Full-time professional effort under a K12 career development award for the specific purpose of maintaining specialty clinical competency. Scholars may not request less than 6 person-months (50%) full-time professional effort devoted to research and career development activities. Scholars must provide a justification clearly stating the reason(s) for the reduced amount of effort. Scholars who have U.S. Veterans' Administration (VA) appointments may not consider part of the VA effort toward satisfying the "full-time" requirement at the applicant institution. All applications must not exceed $750,000 for direct costs per year. The first year's direct costs budget is capped at $50,000. This first year is for advertising and recruitment of Scholars, Advisory Board(s) recruitment and meeting, curriculum planning and development, and development of individual Scholar's curricula. Up to 1.2 person months total effort per annum may be allocated for all PDs/PIs of the K12 program to partially offset their salaries and associated fringe benefit costs, depending on commitment of effort (https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-16-045.html). Salary requests for the Program Faculty/Mentors are not allowed. In years other than year 1 of a new award, if applicable and justified, up to $26,000 per year may be requested to defray the costs of a consultant, Program Administrator, and/or program assistant with responsibilities directly associated with the institutional career development program; salaries must be commensurate with institutional policy for similar positions and specifically identified and justified. Travel for key persons and Advisory Committee members must be justified as specifically required by the proposed program and must not duplicate items generally available for similar programs at the applicant institution. Travel funds at the rate of $1,500 per person will be provided to defray the travel costs to attend a K-12 community conference (a regular conference voluntarily organized by an institute(s) with an NCI K12 award for the purpose of gathering K12 Scholars and Mentors for exchange of knowledge, career development and networking). https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-CA-20-088.html Applications must be submitted electronically.  Applicants must follow the SF424 (R&R) Application Guide, as well as any program-specific instructions noted in Section IV. of the Program Announcement.  When the program-specific instructions deviate from those in the Application Guide, follow the program-specific instructions in Program Announcement.  Applications that do not comply with these instructions may be delayed or not be accepted for review.  For assistance with application submission, please see the Frequently Asked Questions and/or contact eRA Commons Help Desk/Grant.gov contact Center. Please refer to the Program Announcement for application due dates. Applications are due by 5 pm local time. When a standard submission date falls on a weekend or Federal holiday, the application deadline is automatically extended to the next business day. Note: Start dates are determined by the availability of NCI funds and may not occur until well after the earliest possible start date. Subcommittee F convened by the Division of Extramural Activities of the NCI will determine if meets the broad needs of the program and priorities of NCI and the National Cancer Program. For review criteria for the K12 grant mechanism, see the Section V. Application Review Criteria section of the Program Announcement. This is an NCI-specific Program Announcement. For all of the policies governing this award mechanism, refer to the Program Announcement. For required Tables for New and Competing Renewal applications, please see Data tables for use with Institutional Research Training grant applications using the SF424 (R&R). The National Cancer Institute (NCI) Paul Calabresi Career Development Award for Clinical Oncology (K12) must be in compliance with all NIH/NCI policies pertaining to the use of human subjects. These policies apply to all research involving human subjects, not just clinical trials. The K12 is a training and career development grant in which candidate positions are filled at the discretion of the institution, and assignment of candidate positions is generally not known at the time of application or at the time of an award. Due to this uncertainty, the word "Indefinite" should be placed in the box for IRB review date on the face page of the application, and the applicant institution must provide in the submitted grant application a Special Statement on Human Subjects Research. Program Announcement PAR-22-136 (K12 Clinical Trial Optional)    Current List of K12 Awards  Link to Main Peer Review Group NCI-F  Training Funding Opportunities to Promote Diversity  Overview of the Grant Process  NCI Resources for Researchers  NIH Grants Policy Statement (GPS)- see section 12  For additional information regarding policies and/or guidance in preparing an application for the K12 Award, contact: Dr. Mark Damico
	Program Director
	Email: damicomw@mail.nih.gov  Dr. Yansong Bian
	Program Director
	Email: yansong.bian@nih.gov  Branch Phone: 240-276-5630  For assistance with xTrain, contact: Teresa Quinones-Saadipour
	Program Specialist
	Email: Teresa.Quinones-Saadipour@nih.gov
	Phone: 240-276-5644  For technical issues with xTrain, contact the eRA Service Desk For information regarding fiscal and/or budget issues, contact: Grant Management Contact
	Amy Bartosch
	Email: Amy.Bartosch@nih.gov   For information regarding review issues, contact: Referral Officer
	Division of Extramural Activities
	Phone: 240-276-6390
	Fax: 240-276-7682 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Alectinib - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/alectinib
txt: This page contains brief information about alectinib
         and a collection of links to more information about the use of 
         this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Alectinib
         is approved to treat:  Non-small cell lung cancer that is ALK positive  and has metastasized (spread to other parts of the body).  Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Alectinib - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Targeted Cancer Therapies Find Clinical Trials for Alectinib - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Dr. Sylvia Plevritis Engineers Approaches to Understand Metastasis - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/research-programs/csbc/sylvia-plevritis
txt: Sylvia Plevritis, Ph.D., a CSBC Investigator at Stanford University, develops computational tools to analyze genomic and imaging data related to cancer metastasis (i.e., the progressive spread of cancer cells from an initial tumor to another part of the body). She studies cancer because “it’s a deadly disease and we need to do everything in our power to prevent cancer related deaths.” Dr. Plevritis is also optimistic and believes that “we are making progress and will eventually win the war against cancer.” In this interview, she discusses her engineering background, views on cancer systems biology, and her CSBC project investigating tumor immunosuppression and the metastatic cascade. My training in electrical engineering was in a subspecialty known as information theory. This subspecialty aims to decode a “black box” based on how the black box responds to different stimuli. Today, I am applying the basic principles of information theory to my studies of cancer, where cancer is the black box. The study of cancer progression is a major challenge that is well suited for systems biology research. Since we cannot ethically observe the natural history of cancer in people, we must try to unravel it from “disease snapshots” at different times. We often examine disease characteristics at diagnosis and then during different stages of treatment responses. We also try to understand cancer progression in humans from multi-species analyses, often leveraging mouse models of cancer. I have found concepts in sparse regression, multitask learning, linear programming, and topological network analysis to be very powerful in our cancer systems biology research. Computational methods help us integrate data across multiple scales, determine the significance of findings from high-throughput data, and predict the evolution of cancer. The specific approach we use depends on the biological question we are trying to answer and the available data. Fundamental understanding of cancer biology, up-to-date knowledge of the latest experimental technologies, and training in analytical methods that integrate information across different platforms are critical. Also, the commitment to be a continual learner with a genuine interest in talking to and learning from researchers in different disciplines helps! Our Stanford CSBC aims to understand cancer progression by trying to unravel the metastatic cascade. Most cancer patients die of metastatic disease, not their primary tumor. We are testing the hypothesis that initial metastasis to the lymph node triggers systemic immunosuppression, which leads to dissemination of the malignant cells from the primary site to other organs. If our findings support our hypothesis, our work should lead to a paradigm shift in cancer progression and provide new insights for cancer control. The CSBC funding announcement solicited applications that applied systems biology to a focused scientific question. I was confident that we were developing valuable systems biology approaches but did not settle on the scientific question until I met Ed Engleman, a tumor immunologist at Stanford. While Ed and I were waiting for a thesis defense to start, he told me about a new project in his lab examining the role of lymph node metastasis in mouse models. I began to realize that our systems biology approach could be useful in his study of metastases. Ed was working with Garry Nolan, who was a longtime colleague of mine too. There was a natural connection between the three of us. Meanwhile, Garry was developing a novel, highly multiplexed in situ imaging approach that could be applied to study the spatial cellular architecture of lymph node metastasis. These concepts, along with my lab’s development of analytical approaches to integrate complex biological data, formed the crux of our CSBC collaboration. To ensure the translational significance of the work, we set out to study human samples from primary tumors and lymph nodes. This led us to collaborate with John Sunwoo and Andrew Gentles. John has clinical research expertise that enables us to study lymph node metastases of head and neck cancer, while Andrew’s computational expertise helps us generate robust pan-cancer signatures of disease progression. Ultimately, I am hopeful that our CSBC collaboration will lead us to better understand the basic mechanisms underlying metastasis, develop new therapies to improve patient outcomes, and identify potential biomarkers for monitoring cancer progression. Stanford Profile of Sylvia Plevritis  Plevritis Lab Website  Stanford Center for Cancer Systems Biology Website 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Papillary Renal Cell Carcinoma Study - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/ccg/research/structural-genomics/tcga/studied-cancers/papillary-renal-cell-carcinoma
txt: What is kidney cancer? The most common type of kidney cancer is called renal cell carcinoma. This cancer forms in the cells lining the small tubules in the kidney that filter waste from the blood and make urine. An estimated 58,240 Americans were expected to have been diagnosed with kidney cancer and an estimated 13,040 to have died of this cancer in 2010.1 Most people with kidney cancer are usually over 55 years of age and this cancer is more common in men. When detected early, most cases of kidney cancer can be treated effectively. However, survival rates are low when the cancer has spread from the kidney to other parts of the body. Additional information on kidney cancer. TCGA analyzed two common subtypes of renal cell carcinoma: clear cell and papillary. The identification of these subtypes of kidney cancer is based on how the cancer cells look under a microscope. Approximately 8% of cases are papillary carcinoma.2 What have TCGA researchers learned about papillary renal cell carcinoma? Type 1 and Type 2 papillary renal cell carcinoma, defined by differences in the appearance of the tissue under the microscope, are distinct in their genomic profiles.
	81% of Type 1 tumors contained an alteration of the MET gene and may be receptive to specific inhibitors of the MET pathway.
Type 2 is a heterogeneous disease with multiple distinct subtypes.
The CpG island methylation phenotype subtype was found almost exclusively in Type 2 papillary carcinoma and was associated with the least favorable outcomes.
Type 2 is also associated with loss of expression of the tumor suppressor CDKN2A was associated with a poor prognosis.  81% of Type 1 tumors contained an alteration of the MET gene and may be receptive to specific inhibitors of the MET pathway.  Type 2 is a heterogeneous disease with multiple distinct subtypes.  The CpG island methylation phenotype subtype was found almost exclusively in Type 2 papillary carcinoma and was associated with the least favorable outcomes.  Type 2 is also associated with loss of expression of the tumor suppressor CDKN2A was associated with a poor prognosis. 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Cisplatin - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/cisplatin
txt: Cisplatin is a type of chemotherapy drug called an alkylating agent. It contains the metal platinum. It damages the DNA of dividing cells in a way that cannot be repaired. This stops or slows the growth of cancer cells and other rapidly dividing cells and causes them to die. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Cisplatin is approved to be used alone or with other drugs to treat: Bladder cancer. It is used alone in patients with advanced cancer that cannot be treated with other therapies, such as surgery or radiation therapy. Ovarian cancer that has spread to other parts of the body. It is used with other drugs in patients who have already had surgery or radiation therapy. It is used alone in patients whose cancer has not gotten better with  standard chemotherapy and who have not received previous cisplatin. Testicular cancer that has spread to other parts of the body. It is used with other drugs in patients who have already had surgery or radiation therapy. Cisplatin is also being studied in the treatment of other types of cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Cisplatin - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Preventing Chemo Brain? Study Identifies Potential Approach for Common Problem Find Clinical Trials for Cisplatin - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Lowy, Schiller win 2018 Szent-Györgyi Prize - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2018/lowy-schiller-szent-gyorgyi-prize
txt:  Posted:
February 15, 2018  240-760-6600 John T. Schiller, Ph.D. (left) and Douglas R. Lowy, M.D. The 2018 Szent-Györgyi Prize for Progress in Cancer Research will be awarded to Douglas R. Lowy, M.D., and John T. Schiller, Ph.D., of the Center for Cancer Research at the National Cancer Institute (NCI), one of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). They are being recognized for their contributions toward the development of vaccines for the human papillomavirus (HPV). Drs. Schiller and Lowy “have made monumental impacts in the field of cancer sciences and could not be more deserving of this award,” said Sujuan Ba, Ph.D., co-chair of the 2018 prize selection committee and president of the National Foundation for Cancer Research (NFCR), which awards the annual prize. Dr. Lowy, who is also deputy director of NCI, and Dr. Schiller have co-authored more than 150 papers over the last 30 years. Most notably, their work to understand and prevent HPV infection has led to the approval of three preventive HPV vaccines by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). HPV infection causes almost all cases of cervical cancer, the fourth most common cancer in women worldwide, as well as several other cancers. “We at NCI are very proud to see Dr. Lowy and Dr. Schiller awarded this prestigious prize for their important work in cancer research,” said NCI Director Ned Sharpless, M.D. “Their receipt of the Szent-Györgyi Prize for their extraordinary research recognizes how important discoveries come from building on earlier work, and how those efforts can lead to major breakthroughs in public health.” Every year, more than 500,000 women around the world are diagnosed with cervical cancer and more than 275,000 women die from the disease. HPV infection also causes other types of cancer, including about 70 percent of oropharyngeal cancers in the U.S., about 95 percent of anal cancers, and many cases of vulvar, vaginal, and penile cancer. In the 1990s, a team led by Drs. Schiller and Lowy discovered that proteins that form the outer shell of HPV can assemble into noninfectious virus-like particles (VLPs). They found that VLPs could trigger the immune system to produce high levels of protective antibodies. The VLPs became the basis of three FDA-approved vaccines: Gardasil, Gardasil 9, and Cervarix. Drs. Lowy and Schiller attribute their breakthrough to building on earlier scientific findings and say it demonstrates the importance of basic research. “We are greatly honored by this award, and to be included with the exceptional group of scientists who have also received it,” said Dr. Lowy. “Our work that it recognizes is indebted to decades of publicly supported research, as well as to the culture of collaboration in the NIH Intramural Research Program that allowed us to learn from experts across many different disciplines.” Continued research into HPV includes finding ways to encourage vaccination by lowering costs and simplifying the process, especially in the developing world. It has been estimated that widespread uptake of current HPV vaccines could reduce the incidence and mortality of cervical cancer by more than two-thirds. “We are especially pleased to be recognized with this award because it highlights the great importance of research into cancer prevention,” said Dr. Schiller. “These vaccines have the potential to cause HPV infection to go from common to uncommon, and the ability to eliminate cervical cancer and other HPV-associated cancers as major worldwide health problems.” Drs. Schiller and Lowy have been frequently honored for their work. In September 2017, they received the Lasker-DeBakey Clinical Medical Research Award, the nation’s most prestigious biomedical research prize, for their HPV research. They received the Federal Employee of the Year Service to America Medal from the Partnership for Public Service in 2007 and the Albert B. Sabin Gold Medal Award from the Sabin Vaccine Institute in 2011. They were presented with the 2012 National Medal of Technology and Innovation by President Barack Obama in November 2014. NFCR established the Szent-Györgyi Prize in 2006 in honor of its cofounder, Albert Szent-Györgyi, M.D., Ph.D., who received the 1937 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his study of vitamin C and cell respiration. According to NFCR, the annual prize honors scientists “who have made an original discovery or breakthrough in scientific understanding that has had a lasting impact on the cancer field and a direct impact on saving people’s lives.” The award highlights the essential role basic research plays in understanding cancer. The prize will be presented at a ceremony in Washington, D.C., on May 5, 2018. About the National Cancer Institute (NCI): NCI leads the National Cancer Program and the NIH’s efforts to dramatically reduce the prevalence of cancer and improve the lives of cancer patients and their families, through research into prevention and cancer biology, the development of new interventions, and the training and mentoring of new researchers. For more information about cancer, please visit the NCI website at cancer.gov or call NCI’s Contact Center (formerly known as the Cancer Information Service) at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit nih.gov.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Coping – Facing Cancer with Your Spouse or Partner - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/coping/adjusting-to-cancer/spouse-or-partner
txt: Your spouse or partner may feel just as scared by your cancer as you do. You both may feel anxious, helpless, or afraid. You may even find it hard to be taken care of by someone you love. Some relationships get stronger during cancer treatment. Others are weakened. Nearly all couples feel more stress than usual when cancer occurs. They often feel stress about: Knowing how to best support each other and how to communicate  Dealing with new feelings that come up  Making decisions  Juggling lots of roles (such as childcare, housekeeping, work, and caregiving)  Changing their social life  Changing their daily routine  Not feeling connected sexually  It helps to know that people express their emotions in different ways. Some like to talk things out or focus on other people. Others like to focus inward by doing things, such as washing the dishes or fixing things around the house. These differences can cause tension because each person may expect the other to act the way they would in their place. To reduce stress, it may help to remind yourself that everyone reacts differently. But if you don't feel like your communication needs are being met, you may want to seek help from a counselor or social worker. I was so scared when my husband got cancer. I was afraid I wouldn't be able to help him or that he might not recover. And I was afraid to talk about my fears with him because I didn't want to upset him. Ilene Some couples find it easier to talk about serious issues than other couples. Only you and your partner know how you feel about this. The sections below may help you think about ways to communicate that work for both of you. Including your spouse or partner in treatment decisions is important. Together you can meet with your doctor and learn about common symptoms, your treatment choices, and their side effects. This will help you plan for the upcoming weeks and months. Everyone needs to feel needed and loved. You may have always been the "strong one" in your family, but now is the time to let your loved one help you. This can be as simple as letting the other person fluff your pillow, bring you a cool drink, or read to you. And in turn, make sure you help your partner. You can simply express gratitude and let them know you understand it's a tough time for them too. Some things that cause stress for you and your partner can't be solved right now. And yet sometimes talking about these things can be helpful. Look at the issues that bother you such as dealing with the unknown or feeling a strain between you. You may want to say up front, "I know we can't solve this today. But I'd like to just talk about how it's going and how we're feeling." Getting things out into the open may help you both. You and your partner may need to be a team now more than ever. It may help to think things through together. Talk about what decisions you should make together and which ones you should make alone. You may want to decide what tasks to share and if other people in your life could help with them. Many couples find that it helps to plan special occasions. Some days may end up being better than others, depending on how your partner feels. So you may need to be okay with last-minute changes. Your dates don't have to be fancy. It's about spending time together. That can mean renting a movie, going out to eat or for an event, or looking through old photos. It can be whatever you both like to do. You can also plan these dates to include other people, if you miss being around others.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Secondhand Smoke and Cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/tobacco/second-hand-smoke-fact-sheet
txt:  What is secondhand smoke?  How is secondhand smoke exposure measured?  Does secondhand smoke contain harmful chemicals?  Does secondhand smoke cause cancer?  What are the other health effects of exposure to secondhand smoke?  How can you protect yourself and your family from  secondhand smoke?  Do electronic cigarettes emit secondhand smoke?  What is being done to reduce nonsmokers’ exposure to secondhand smoke?  What is secondhand smoke? How is secondhand smoke exposure measured? Does secondhand smoke contain harmful chemicals? Does secondhand smoke cause cancer? What are the other health effects of exposure to secondhand smoke? How can you protect yourself and your family from  secondhand smoke? Do electronic cigarettes emit secondhand smoke? What is being done to reduce nonsmokers’ exposure to secondhand smoke? What is secondhand smoke? Secondhand smoke (sometimes called passive smoke, environmental tobacco smoke, or involuntary smoke) is a mixture of sidestream smoke (the smoke from the burning tip of a cigarette or other smoked tobacco product) and mainstream smoke (smoke exhaled by a smoker that is diluted by the surrounding air) (1–3). Major settings of exposure to secondhand smoke include workplaces, public places such as bars, restaurants and recreational settings, and homes (4). Workplaces and homes are especially important sources of exposure because of the length of time people spend in these settings. The home is a particularly important source of exposure for infants and young children. Children and nonsmoking adults can also be exposed to secondhand smoke in vehicles, where levels of exposure can be high. Exposure levels can also be high in enclosed public places where smoking is allowed, such as restaurants, bars, and casinos, resulting in substantial exposures for both workers and patrons (3). In the United States, most secondhand smoke comes from cigarettes, followed by pipes, cigars, and other smoked tobacco products. How is secondhand smoke exposure measured? Secondhand smoke exposure can be measured by testing indoor air for respirable (breathable) suspended particles (particles small enough to reach the lower airways of the human lung) or individual chemicals such as nicotine or other harmful and potentially harmful constituents of tobacco smoke (3, 5). Exposure to secondhand smoke can also be evaluated by measuring the level of biomarkers such as cotinine (a byproduct of nicotine metabolism) in a nonsmoker’s blood, saliva, or urine (1). Nicotine, cotinine, and other chemicals present in secondhand smoke have been found in the body fluids of nonsmokers exposed to secondhand smoke. Does secondhand smoke contain harmful chemicals? Yes. Many of the harmful chemicals that are in the smoke inhaled by smokers are also found in secondhand smoke (1, 3, 6, 7), including some that cause cancer (1, 3, 7, 8). These include: Benzene  Tobacco-specific nitrosamines  Benzo[α]pyrene  1,3–butadiene (a hazardous gas)  Cadmium (a toxic metal)  Formaldehyde  Acetaldehyde  Many factors affect which chemicals and how much of them are found in secondhand smoke. These factors include the type of tobacco used in manufacturing a specific product, the chemicals (including flavorings such as menthol) added to the tobacco, the way the tobacco product is smoked, and—for cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, and cigarillos—the material in which the tobacco is wrapped (1–3, 7). Does secondhand smoke cause cancer? Yes. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. National Toxicology Program, the U.S. Surgeon General, and the International Agency for Research on Cancer have all classified secondhand smoke as a known human carcinogen (a cancer-causing agent) (1, 3, 7, 9). In addition, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has concluded that secondhand smoke is an occupational carcinogen (3). The Surgeon General estimates that, during 2005-2009, secondhand smoke exposure caused more than 7,300 lung cancer deaths among adult nonsmokers each year (10). Some research also suggests that secondhand smoke may increase the risk of breast cancer, nasal sinus cavity cancer, and nasopharyngeal cancer in adults (10) and the risk of leukemia, lymphoma, and brain tumors in children (3). Additional research is needed to determine whether a link exists between secondhand smoke exposure and these cancers. What are the other health effects of exposure to secondhand smoke? Secondhand smoke is associated with disease and premature death in nonsmoking adults and children (3, 7). Exposure to secondhand smoke irritates the airways and has immediate harmful effects on a person’s heart and blood vessels. It increases the risk of heart disease by about 25 to 30% (3). In the United States, secondhand smoke is estimated to cause nearly 34,000 heart disease deaths each year (10). Exposure to secondhand smoke also increases the risk of stroke by 20 to 30% (10). Secondhand smoke exposure during pregnancy has been found to cause reduced fertility, pregnancy complications, and poor birth outcomes, including impaired lung development, low birth weight, and preterm delivery (11). Children exposed to secondhand smoke are at increased risk of sudden infant death syndrome, ear infections, colds, pneumonia, bronchitis, and more severe asthma. Being exposed to secondhand smoke slows the growth of children’s lungs and can cause them to cough, wheeze, and feel breathless (3, 7, 10). There is no safe level of exposure to secondhand smoke. Even low levels of secondhand smoke can be harmful. How can you protect yourself and your family from  secondhand smoke? The only way to fully protect nonsmokers from secondhand smoke is to eliminate smoking in indoor workplaces and public places and by creating smokefree policies for personal spaces, including multiunit residential housing. Opening windows, using fans and ventilation systems, and restricting smoking to certain rooms in the home or to certain times of the day does not eliminate exposure to secondhand smoke (3, 4). Steps you can take to protect yourself and your family include: not allowing smoking in your home  not allowing anyone to smoke in your car, even with the windows down  making sure the places where your children are cared for are tobacco free  teaching children to avoid secondhand smoke  seeking out restaurants, bars, and other places that are smokefree (if your state still allows smoking in public areas)  protecting your family from secondhand smoke and being a good role model by not smoking or using any other type of tobacco product. For help to quit see smokefree.gov or call 1-877-44U-QUIT.  Do electronic cigarettes emit secondhand smoke? Electronic cigarettes (also called e-cigarettes, vape pens, vapes, and pod mods) are battery-powered devices designed to heat a liquid, which typically contains nicotine, into an aerosol for inhalation by a user. Following inhalation, the user exhales the aerosol (12). The use of electronic cigarettes results in exposure to secondhand aerosols (rather than secondhand smoke). Secondhand aerosols contain harmful and potentially harmful substances, including nicotine, heavy metals like lead, volatile organic compounds, and cancer-causing agents. More information about these devices is available on CDC’s Electronic Cigarettes page. What is being done to reduce nonsmokers’ exposure to secondhand smoke? On the federal level, several policies restricting smoking in public places have been implemented. Federal law prohibits smoking on airline flights, interstate buses, and most trains. Smoking is also prohibited in most federal buildings by Executive Order 13058 of 1997. The Pro-Children Act of 1994 prohibits smoking in facilities that routinely provide federally funded services to children. The Department of Housing and Urban Development published a final rule in December 2016, which was fully implemented in July 2018, that prohibits the use of cigarettes, cigars, pipes, and hookah (waterpipes) in public housing authorities, including all living units, indoor common areas, and administrative offices, as well as outdoor areas within 25 feet of buildings. Many state and local governments have enacted laws that prohibit smoking in workplaces and public places, including restaurants, bars, schools, hospitals, airports, bus terminals, parks, and beaches. These smokefree policies have substantially decreased exposure to secondhand smoke in many U.S. workplaces (13). More than half of all states have implemented comprehensive smokefree laws that prohibit smoking in indoor areas of workplaces, restaurants, and bars, and some states and communities also have enacted laws regulating smoking in multi-unit housing and cars (14). The American Nonsmokers' Rights Foundation provides a list of state and local smokefree air policies. To highlight the health risks from secondhand smoke, the National Cancer Institute requires that meetings and conferences organized or primarily sponsored by NCI be held in a state, county, city, or town that has adopted a comprehensive smokefree policy, unless specific circumstances justify an exception to this policy. Healthy People 2020, a comprehensive nationwide health promotion and disease prevention framework established by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), includes several objectives addressing the goal of reducing illness, disability, and death caused by tobacco use and secondhand smoke exposure. For 2020, the Healthy People goal is to reduce the proportion of nonsmokers exposed to secondhand smoke by 10%. To assist with achieving this goal, Healthy People 2020 includes ideas for community interventions, such as encouraging the introduction of smokefree policies in all workplaces and other public gathering places, such as public parks, sporting arenas, and beaches. Because of these policies and other actions, the percentage of nonsmokers who are exposed to secondhand smoke declined from 52.5% during 1999–2000 to 25.3% during 2011–2014 (15). Exposure to secondhand smoke declined among all population subgroups, but disparities still exist. During 2011–2014, 38% of children ages 3–11 years, 50% of non-Hispanic blacks, 48% of people living below the poverty level, and 39% of people living in rental housing were exposed to secondhand smoke (15).
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Ipilimumab - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/ipilimumab
txt: Ipilimumab is a type of targeted therapy drug called an immune checkpoint inhibitor (a type of immunotherapy). It is a monoclonal antibody that binds to the protein CTLA-4 on immune cells called T cells. It works by keeping cancer cells from suppressing the immune system. This allows the immune system to attack and kill the cancer cells. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Ipilimumab is approved to treat: Colorectal cancer in adults and children aged 12 years and older. Ipilimumab is used with nivolumab to treat metastatic microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) or mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) cancer that got worse after treatment with a fluoropyrimidine, oxaliplatin, and irinotecan hydrochloride.¹ Esophageal cancer that cannot be removed by surgery or has spread to other parts of the body. Ipilimumab is used with nivolumab as the first treatment in adults with squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Hepatocellular carcinoma (a type of liver cancer).  Ipilimumab is used with nivolumab in patients who have already been treated with sorafenib.¹ Malignant pleural mesothelioma.  Ipilimumab is used with nivolumab as the first treatment in adults whose cancer cannot be removed by surgery. Melanoma.Ipilimumab is used alone to help prevent melanoma from coming back after  surgery to remove  melanoma in the skin and lymph nodes.Ipilimumab is used in alone or with nivolumab in adults and alone  in children aged 12 years and older whose cancer cannot be removed by surgery or has spread to other parts of the body. Non-small cell lung cancer. Ipilimumab is used with nivolumab as the first treatment in adults with:Cancer that has spread to other parts of the body and has the PD-L1 protein but does not have a  mutation in the EGFR or ALK gene.Cancer that has spread to other parts of the body or has come back and does not have a  mutation in the EGFR or ALK gene.  It is used with platinum chemotherapy. Renal cell carcinoma (a type of kidney cancer) that is advanced.   Ipilimumab is used with nivolumab in some patients with renal cell carcinoma as the first treatment. Ipilimumab is used alone to help prevent melanoma from coming back after  surgery to remove  melanoma in the skin and lymph nodes. Ipilimumab is used in alone or with nivolumab in adults and alone  in children aged 12 years and older whose cancer cannot be removed by surgery or has spread to other parts of the body. Cancer that has spread to other parts of the body and has the PD-L1 protein but does not have a  mutation in the EGFR or ALK gene. Cancer that has spread to other parts of the body or has come back and does not have a  mutation in the EGFR or ALK gene.  It is used with platinum chemotherapy. ¹This use is approved under FDA’s Accelerated Approval Program. As a condition of approval, a confirmatory trial(s) must show that ipilimumab provides a clinical benefit in these patients. Ipilimumab is also being studied in the treatment of other types of cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Ipilimumab - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Immunotherapy and… Nothing Else? Studies Test Potential Paradigm Shift in Cancer Treatment Study Identifies a Potential Cause of Immunotherapy’s Heart-Related Side Effects Targeted Cancer Therapies Cancer Immunotherapies Don’t Work for Everyone: HLA Gene May Explain Why Immunotherapy Combination Most Effective as Initial Treatment for BRAF+ Melanoma Study Details Long-Term Side Effects of Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors Monoclonal Antibodies Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors Find Clinical Trials for Ipilimumab - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Fatigue - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/rare-brain-spine-tumor/living/symptoms/fatigue
txt: There are many ways you can manage and cope with your fatigue. Fatigue is an extreme sense of tiredness and lack of energy. It is different from simply being tired. It is distressing, debilitating, and can interfere with daily activities. Fatigue is the most common side effect of cancer treatment, but it can also be caused by a brain or spine tumor or medications used to treat side effects. Fatigue may be associated with the following changes: Cognitive changes, including difficulty speaking or concentrating, as well as short-term memory loss  Activity changes, including a decrease in physical activity  Life changes, including altered work, play, or study habits, and a decline in family interaction  Emotional changes, such as feeling sad  There are many ways you can manage and cope with fatigue: Keep a daily log of your fatigue and what you are doing to manage it using the My STORITM app or a journal. Track all the symptoms that you have. Fatigue can occur with other symptoms, such as pain, weakness, or sleep disturbance.  Try to conserve your energy. To do so, plan your tasks mindfully and set realistic expectations to prevent wasting energy. Prioritize and space out activities. Delegate the less essential tasks so you have energy for the things that matter most. Plan activities during the times you feel your best.  Explore self-care activities that can help you cope with and improve your fatigue, including diet, exercise, and sleep:
	Try to follow the diet your doctor or dietitian recommends. Eating five or six small meals and snacks throughout the day may help keep your metabolism working and control your blood sugar so your energy stays more stable. Eating enough protein and calories can help you maintain your strength.
Pack small, healthy snacks for when you are on the go, so you don’t find yourself feeling fatigued and without food.
Stay hydrated to prevent and improve fatigue. Aim for 8 cups of liquids each day. Limit your intake of caffeine and alcohol.
Ask your doctor about getting a referral to cognitive behavioral therapy or a registered dietician.
Employ mindfulness and stress reduction practices, such as meditation, journaling, or relaxation breathing.
Try to nap during the daytime for less than one hour, so it does not prevent you from getting a full night’s rest.  Try to follow the diet your doctor or dietitian recommends. Eating five or six small meals and snacks throughout the day may help keep your metabolism working and control your blood sugar so your energy stays more stable. Eating enough protein and calories can help you maintain your strength.  Pack small, healthy snacks for when you are on the go, so you don’t find yourself feeling fatigued and without food.  Stay hydrated to prevent and improve fatigue. Aim for 8 cups of liquids each day. Limit your intake of caffeine and alcohol.  Ask your doctor about getting a referral to cognitive behavioral therapy or a registered dietician.  Employ mindfulness and stress reduction practices, such as meditation, journaling, or relaxation breathing.  Try to nap during the daytime for less than one hour, so it does not prevent you from getting a full night’s rest.  Discuss any concerns you have with your doctor. Share the symptoms you’ve logged and your self-care activities. Ask your doctor when and how to report your symptoms, and which symptoms are urgent to report.  Report if your fatigue gets worse, if it is severe (e.g., difficulty completing daily tasks), or if it does not improve with your self-care activities. 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Neuroblastoma Screening - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/neuroblastoma/patient/neuroblastoma-screening-pdq
txt:  What is screening?  General Information About Neuroblastoma Cancer  Neuroblastoma Screening  Risks of Neuroblastoma Screening  About This PDQ Summary  Screening is looking for cancer before a person has any symptoms. This can help find cancer at an early stage. When abnormal tissue or cancer is found early, it may be easier to treat. By the time symptoms appear, cancer may have begun to spread. Scientists are trying to better understand which people are more likely to get certain types of cancer. They also study the things we do and the things around us to see if they cause cancer. This information helps doctors recommend who should be screened for cancer, which screening tests should be used, and how often the tests should be done. It is important to remember that your doctor does not necessarily think you have cancer if he or she suggests a screening test. Screening tests are given when you have no cancer symptoms. If a screening test result is abnormal, you may need to have more tests done to find out if you have cancer. These are called diagnostic tests. Neuroblastoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in nerve tissue. Most cases of neuroblastoma are
diagnosed before 1 year of age. The risk factors for neuroblastoma are not known. Neuroblastoma often begins in the nerve tissue of the adrenal glands. There are two adrenal glands, one on top of each kidney, in the back of the upper abdomen. The adrenal glands make important hormones that help control heart rate, blood pressure, blood sugar, and the way the body reacts to stress. Neuroblastoma may also begin in the abdomen,  chest, spinal cord, or in nerve tissue near the spine in the neck. Neuroblastoma most often begins during early childhood, usually in children younger than 5 years of age. For more information about neuroblastoma, see  Neuroblastoma Treatment. Neuroblastoma is the most common type of cancer in infants.  The number of new
cases of neuroblastoma is greatest among children under 1 year of age. As children get older, the number of new cases 
decreases.  Neuroblastoma is slightly more common in males  than
females. Neuroblastoma sometimes forms before birth but is usually found later, when the tumor begins to grow and cause symptoms. In rare cases, neuroblastoma may be found before birth by fetal ultrasound. Tests are used to screen for different types of cancer when a person does not have symptoms. There is no standard or routine screening test for neuroblastoma. Screening for neuroblastoma may not help the child live longer. Screening tests for neuroblastoma are being studied in clinical trials. Scientists study screening tests to find those with the fewest harms and most benefits. Cancer screening trials also are meant to show whether early detection (finding cancer before it causes symptoms) helps a person live longer or decreases a person's chance of dying from the disease. For some types of cancer, the chance of recovery is better if the disease is found and treated at an early stage. There is no standard or routine screening test used to find neuroblastoma. A  urine test is sometimes used  to check for  neuroblastoma,  usually when the child is 6 months old. This is a test in which urine is collected for 24 hours to measure the amounts of certain substances. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease in the organ or tissue that makes it. A higher than normal amount of homovanillic acid (HMA) and vanillyl mandelic acid (VMA) may be a sign of neuroblastoma. Studies have shown  that  screening for neuroblastoma does not decrease  the chance of dying from the
disease. Almost all neuroblastomas that are found by screening children at 6 months of age are the type that have a good prognosis (chance of recovery). Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. Screening tests have risks. The risks of neuroblastoma screening include the following: Neuroblastoma may be overdiagnosed.False-negative test results can occur.False-positive test results can occur. Neuroblastoma may be overdiagnosed. False-negative test results can occur. False-positive test results can occur. Decisions about screening tests can be difficult. Not all screening tests are helpful and most have risks. Before having any screening test, you may want to discuss the test with your doctor. It is important to know the risks of the test and whether it has been proven to reduce the risk of dying from cancer. When a screening test result leads to the diagnosis and treatment of a disease that may never have caused symptoms or become life-threatening, it is called overdiagnosis. For example, when a urine test result shows a higher than normal amount of homovanillic acid (HMA) or vanillyl mandelic acid (VMA), tests and treatments for neuroblastoma are likely to be done, but may not be needed. At this time, it is not possible to know which neuroblastomas found by a screening test will cause symptoms and which neuroblastomas will not. Diagnostic tests (such as biopsies) and cancer treatments (such as surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy) can have serious risks, including physical and emotional problems. Screening test results may appear to be normal even though neuroblastoma is present. A person who receives a false-negative test result (one that shows there is no cancer when there really is) may delay seeking medical care even if there are symptoms. Screening test results may appear to be abnormal even though no cancer is present. A false-positive test result (one that shows there is cancer when there really isn't) can cause anxiety and is usually followed by more tests and procedures, which also have risks. Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish. PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about neuroblastoma screening.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Screening and Prevention Editorial Board. A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Screening and Prevention Editorial Board. PDQ Neuroblastoma Screening. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/neuroblastoma/patient/neuroblastoma-screening-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389302] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online. Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Multimedia | Videos | Infographics - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/multimedia
txt: The National Cancer Institute’s collection of multimedia includes photography, illustrations, videos, and infographics. Most of these multimedia assets are in the public domain, may be used free of charge for any educational or non-commercial purpose, and cannot be copyrighted. They may not be used to state or imply NCI’s endorsement of any commercial product, service, or activity. Please credit the source of these products as: The National Cancer Institute. Videos on NCI's YouTube channels may be embedded on your own websites and social media channels. NCI maintains the following two channels: National Cancer Institute  NCI Scientific Events and Webinars  Graphical representations of cancer-related statistics and other NCI information may be downloaded from NCI Visuals Online. Publicly available cancer-related photographs and biomedical illustrations may be downloaded from NCI Visuals Online. A small collection of b-roll videos may be downloaded from NCI Visuals Online.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: National Cancer Act of 1971 - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/overview/history/national-cancer-act-1971
txt: President Richard Nixon signing the National Cancer Act of 1971. The National Cancer Institute was established in its current form by the National Cancer Act of 1971, signed into law by President Richard Nixon. This legislation was an amendment to the Public Health Service Act of 1944 and represented the US commitment to what President Nixon described as the “war on cancer,” which had become the nation’s second leading cause of death by 1970. The act granted broad authority to the director of NCI to plan and develop a National Cancer Program that included NCI, other research institutes, and other federal and nonfederal programs. It established the procedure for submitting NCI’s annual budget proposal, called the “professional judgement budget,” which is transmitted directly from the NCI director to the President and Congress. In addition to expanding the authority of the NCI director, the act required the creation of a new National Cancer Advisory Board (NCAB), a presidentially appointed committee of 18 members, to assist NCI in developing its programs. It also established the President’s Cancer Panel (PCP), a three-member panel that submits an annual report on a special topic to the President and holds periodic public hearings. With input from the NCAB, the NCI director may create new cancer centers and researcher and physician training programs, appoint advisory committees, award contracts for research, expand the physical location at NIH and other research facilities, conduct cancer control activities, establish an international cancer research data bank, award research grants, and collaborate with other federal, state, or local public agencies and private industry. Finally, the act provided additional funding for NCI to establish 15 new cancer research centers, local control programs, and an international cancer research data bank. Senate Bill 1828 — Enacted December 23, 1971 (P.L. 92-218) This bill strengthened NCI in carrying out the national effort against cancer by creating the National Cancer Program. It mandated the following: The program be developed by the NCI director with the advice of the National Cancer Advisory Board (NCAB), a presidentially appointed committee of 18 members, including both distinguished scientists and laypersons from the general public. The NCAB also includes ex officio members from other government agencies.  A three-member panel, the President’s Cancer Panel (PCP), review the program by holding periodic public hearings and submitting an annual progress report directly to the President.  The annual budget of NCI, called the bypass budget, be submitted directly to the President, bypassing traditional approval by the NIH or the Department of Health and Human Services required of other NIH institutes.  The NCI director and members of the NCAB and PCP be presidential appointees.  The director of NCI was given additional authorities, in consultation with NCAB, under the act that include:
	Create new cancer centers and manpower training programs
Appoint advisory committees, allowing the director to explore new issues/opportunities
Expand the physical location at NIH and other research facilities across the country
Award contracts for research
Collaborate with other federal, state, or local public agencies and private industry
Conduct cancer control activities
Establish an international cancer research data bank that collects, catalogues, stores, and disseminates results of cancer research
Award research grants  Create new cancer centers and manpower training programs  Appoint advisory committees, allowing the director to explore new issues/opportunities  Expand the physical location at NIH and other research facilities across the country  Award contracts for research  Collaborate with other federal, state, or local public agencies and private industry  Conduct cancer control activities  Establish an international cancer research data bank that collects, catalogues, stores, and disseminates results of cancer research  Award research grants  Committee Report No. 92-247 (June 28, 1971) The Committee on Labor and Public Welfare submitted the following report to accompany S. 1828. 92nd Congress, 1st Session. “There is broad agreement that cancer research has advanced to the stage where a substantial increase in resources and effort could be very productive. There seems to be a consensus among cancer researchers that they are within striking distance of achieving the basic understanding of cancer cells which has eluded the most brilliant medical minds in the world. While it is true that breakthroughs in science are often serendipitous, and cannot be forced, the committee feels that a substantial increase in resources, along with increased organization efficiency will shorten the time necessary to achieve them.” The committee believes that effective implementation of a substantially increased effort against cancer will require strengthening of present organizational arrangement within NIH.  The committee agrees that to completely separate the cancer research effort from NIH could endanger the overall biomedical research effort. The committee feels, however, that S. 1828, as reported, will meet the objectives of the Cancer Panel, while preserving the integrity of biomedical research by keeping the increased cancer research program within the framework of NIH.  The committee is cognizant of the extreme difficulty in mounting a program of the size and scope of that here envisioned and doubts that it could be accomplished within present arrangements for the NCI, although the institute has been very effective in utilizing the resources allocated to it.  The committee understands that since the President has stated he will assume personal command of the program, and that he wants the director to be personally accountable to them, he does not intend to make broader use of this authority. It is therefore the committee’s intent that the director be treated under the Budget and Accounting Act of 1921 as a head of a department or establishment of government. In this regard, the committee intends that the director of the Cancer Conquest Agency will make a copy of the agency’s annual budget and program available to the director of the NIH not later than the time of its submission to the President.  The committee hopes that the existing peer review system so highly regarded by the scientific community will be continued. The committee feels, however, that the extraordinary demands placed on this new cancer program may require the creation of new mechanisms of peer review. The bill therefore authorizes the director to establish, with the approval of the NCAB, other formal peer review groups as may be required.  The committee felt that the NCAB would be required to make decisions and recommendation that are largely scientific in nature, and therefore it should contain a predominance of scientific and medical personnel, while at the same time having the laymen public point of view represented.  Senate Resolution 376: Introduced March 25, 1970
This resolution authorized the Committee on Labor and Public Welfare to study cancer research activities, calling for a report on the present status of scientific research conducted by governmental and nongovernmental agencies to ascertain the causes and develop means for the treatment, cure, and elimination of cancer. On April 15, 1970, the committee reported out Senate Resolution 376 for referral to the Senate Committee on Rules and Administration. The resolution passed the Senate by unanimous vote on April 27, 1970.  The sum of $250,000 was authorized to the committee to carry out this cancer study.  To carry out the study, the committee established a panel of Consultants on the Conquest of Cancer, composed of 13 eminent laymen and 13 eminent scientists. The panel met on June 29, 1970, and was asked to submit its report no later than December 15, 1970.  A House Concurrent Resolution 675 was introduced July 15, 1970, and passed by both the House and the Senate expressing the unanimous sense that the Conquest of Cancer is a national crusade.  Report of the Panel of Consultants: “A National Program for the Conquest of Cancer”
The report was transmitted to the Committee on Labor and Public Welfare on November 25, 1970; (Report No. 91–1402, 91st Congress, 2nd Session) ordered to be printed as Senate Document No. 92–9. The principal findings and recommendations of the panel were as follows: Cancer is the number one health concern of the American people and cancer incidence is increasing.  The nature of cancer is not yet fully known and the amount spent on cancer is grossly inadequate. In 1969, for every man, woman, and child, the US spent only $0.889 on cancer research.  The cure rate for cancer is gradually improving. In 1930, we were able to cure only about one case in five; today we cure one in three, but the cure rate can be improved by a better application of the knowledge that we know today.  The development of a comprehensive national program for the conquest of cancer is now essential. Such a program will require three major ingredients that are not present today: effective administration with clearly defined authority and responsibility, a comprehensive national plan, and necessary financial resources.  Senate Bills to Implement the Panel Report: S. 4564(91st Congress), S. 34 (92nd Congress)
On December 4, 1970, Senator Yarborough introduced S. 4564, the Conquest of Cancer Act, which was based on the recommendations of the Panel of Consultants. While no action could be taken on this bill in the few days remaining for the 91st Congress, a similar bill (S. 34) was introduced in the 92nd Congress on January 25, 1971.  President’s Second Supplemental Appropriation Bill: May 24, 1971
Following the delivery of two important statements, President Nixon called for a total national commitment to an intensive campaign to find a cure for cancer. He stated that he would ask for an appropriation of an extra $100 million and that he would establish a Cancer Conquest Program.  The passage of this bill made the additional appropriated funds available on July 1, 1971.  On May 11, 1971, Senator Dominick and Senator Griffin introduced on behalf of the administration, S. 1828, an “Act to Conquer Cancer.”  PUBLIC LAW 92-218
92ND CONGRESS, S. 1828
DECEMBER 23, 1971
AN ACT To amend the Public Health Service Act so as to strengthen the National Cancer Institute and the National Institutes of Health in order more effectively to carry out the national effort against cancer. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled. SECTION 1. This act may be cited as "The National Cancer Act of 1971." SEC. 2. (a) The Congress finds and declares: (1) that the incidence of cancer is increasing and cancer is the disease which is the major health concern of Americans today; (2) that new scientific leads, if comprehensively and energetically exploited, may significantly advance the time when more adequate preventive and therapeutic capabilities are available to cope with cancer; (3) that cancer is a leading cause of death in the United States; (4) that the present state of our understanding of cancer is a consequence of broad advances across the full scope of the biomedical sciences; (5) that a great opportunity is offered as a result of recent advances in the knowledge of this dread disease to conduct energetically a national program against cancer; (6) that in order to provide for the most effective attack on cancer it is important to use all of the biomedical resources of the National Institutes of Health; and (7) that the programs of the research institutes which comprise the National Institutes of Health have made it possible to bring into being the most productive scientific community centered upon health and disease that the world has ever known. (b) It is the purpose of this act to enlarge the authorities of the National Cancer Institute and the National Institutes of Health in order to advance the national effort against cancer. SEC. 3. (a) Part A of title IV of the Public Health Service Act is amended by adding after section 406 the following new sections: SEC. 407. (a) The director of the National Cancer Institute shall coordinate all of the activities of the National Institutes of Health relating to cancer with the National Cancer Program. (b) In carrying out the National Cancer program, the director of the National Cancer Institute shall: (1) With the advice of the National Cancer Advisory Board, plan and develop an expanded, intensified, and coordinated cancer research program encompassing the programs of the National Cancer Institute, related programs of the other research institutes, and other federal and nonfederal programs. (2) Expeditiously utilize existing research facilities and personnel of the National Institutes of Health for accelerated exploration of opportunities in areas of special promise. (3) Encourage and coordinate cancer research by industrial concerns where such concerns evidence a particular capability for such research. (4) Collect, analyze, and disseminate all data useful in the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer, including the establishment of an international cancer research data bank to collect, catalog, store, and disseminate insofar as feasible the results of cancer research undertaken in any country for the use of any person involved in cancer research in any country. (5) Establish or support the large-scale production or distribution of specialized biological materials and other therapeutic substances for research and set standards of safety and care for persons using such materials. (6) Support research in the cancer field outside the United States by highly qualified foreign nationals which research can be expected to inure to the benefit of the American people; support collaborative research involving American and foreign participants; and support the training of American scientists abroad and foreign scientists in the United States. (7) Support appropriate manpower programs of training in fundamental sciences and clinical disciplines to provide an expanded and continuing manpower base from which to select investigators, physicians, and allied health professions personnel, for participation in clinical and basic research and treatment programs relating to cancer, including where appropriate the use of training stipends, fellowships, and career awards. (8) Call special meetings of the National Cancer Advisory Board at such times and in such places as the director deems necessary in order to consult with, obtain advice from, or to secure the approval of projects, programs, or other actions to be undertaken without delay in order to gain maximum benefit from a new scientific or technical finding. (9) (A) Prepare and submit, directly to the President for review and transmittal to Congress, an annual budget estimate for the National Cancer Program, after reasonable opportunity for comment (but without change) by the secretary, the director of the National Institutes of Health, and the National Cancer Advisory Board; and (B) receive from the President and the Office of Management and Budget directly all funds appropriated by Congress for obligation and expenditure by the National Cancer Institute. (c) There is established the President's Cancer Panel (hereinafter in this section referred to as the 'panel') which shall be composed of three persons appointed by the President, who by virtue of their training, experience, and background are exceptionally qualified to appraise the National Cancer Program. At least two of the members of the panel shall be distinguished scientists or physicians. (2) (A) Members of the panel shall be appointed for three-year terms, except that (i) in the case of two of the members first appointed, one shall be appointed for a term of one year and one shall be appointed for a term of two years, as designated by the President at the time of appointment, and (ii) any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term for which their predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of such term. (B) The President shall designate one of the members to serve as chairman for a term of one year. (C) Members of the panel shall each be entitled to receive the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay in effect for grade GS-18 of the General Schedule for each day (including traveltime) during which they are engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the panel, and shall be allowed travel expenses (including a per diem allowance) under section 5703(b) of title 5, United States Code. (3) The panel shall meet at the call of the chairman, but not less often than twelve times a year. A transcript shall be kept of the proceedings of each meeting of the panel, and the chairman shall make such transcript available to the public. (4) The panel shall monitor the development and execution of the National Cancer Program under this section, and shall report directly to the President. Any delays or blockages in rapid execution of the program shall immediately be brought to the attention of the President. The panel shall submit to the President periodic progress reports on the program and annually an evaluation of the efficacy of the program and suggestions for improvements, and shall submit such other reports as the President shall direct. At the request of the President, it shall submit for their consideration a list of names of persons for consideration for appointment as director of the National Cancer Institute. SEC. 408. (a) The director of the National Cancer Institute is authorized to provide for the establishment of fifteen new centers for clinical research, training, and demonstration of advanced diagnostic and treatment methods relating to cancer. Such centers may be supported under subsection (b) or under any other applicable provision of law. (b) The director of the National Cancer Institute, under policies established by the director of the National Institutes of Health and after consultation with the National Cancer Advisory Board, is authorized to enter into cooperative agreements with public or private nonprofit agencies or institutions to pay all or part of the cost of planning, establishing, or strengthening, and providing basic operating support for existing or new centers (including, but not limited to, centers established under subsection (a) for clinical research, training, and demonstration of advanced diagnostic and treatment methods relating to cancer. Federal payments under this subsection in support of such cooperative agreements may be used for (1) construction (notwithstanding any limitation under section 405), (2) staffing and other basic operating costs, including such patient care costs as are required for research, (3) training (including training for allied health professions personnel), and (4) demonstration purposes; but support under this subsection (other than support for construction) shall not exceed $5,000,000 per year per center. Support of a center under this section may be for a period of not to exceed three years and may be extended by the director of the National Cancer Institute for additional periods of not more than three years each, after review of the operations of such center by an appropriate scientific review group established by the director of the National Cancer Institute. SEC. 409. (a) The director of the National Cancer Institute shall establish programs as necessary for cooperation with state and other health agencies in the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of cancer. (b) There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $20,000,000 for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1972, $30,000,000 for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1973, and $40,000,000 for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1974. SEC. 410. The director of the National Cancer Institute (after consultation with the National Cancer Advisory Board), in carrying out their functions in administering the National Cancer Program and without regard to any other provision of this act, is authorized: (1) if authorized by the National Cancer Advisory Board, to obtain (in accordance with section 309 of title 5, United States Code, but without regard to the limitation in such section on the number of days or the period of such service) the services of not more than fifty experts or consultants who have scientific or professional qualifications; (2) to acquire, construct, improve, repair, operate, and maintain cancer centers, laboratories, research, and other necessary facilities and equipment, and related accommodations as may be necessary, and such other real or personal property (including patents) as the director deems necessary; to acquire, without regard to the act of March 3, 1877 (40 U.S.C. 340, by lease or otherwise through the Administrator of General Services, buildings or parts of buildings in the District of Columbia or communities located adjacent to the District of Columbia for the use of the National Cancer Institute for a period not to exceed ten years; (3) to appoint one or more advisory committees composed of such private citizens and officials of federal, state, and local governments as they deem desirable to advise them with respect to their functions; (4) to utilize, with their consent, the services, equipment, personnel, information, and facilities of other federal, state, or local public agencies, with or without reimbursement therefor; (5) to accept voluntary and uncompensated services; (6) to accept unconditional gifts, or donations of services, money, or property, real, personal, or mixed, tangible or intangible; (7) to enter into such contracts, leases, cooperative agreements, or other transactions, without regard to sections 3648 and 3709 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (31 U.S.C. 529, 41 U.S.C. 5), as may be necessary in the conduct of their functions, with any public agency, or with any person, firm, association, corporation, or educational institution; and (8) to take necessary action to insure that all channels for the dissemination and exchange of scientific knowledge and information are maintained between the National Cancer Institute and the other scientific, medical, and biomedical disciplines and organizations nationally and internationally. SEC. 410A. (a) The director of the National Cancer Institute shall, by regulation, provide for proper scientific review of all research grants and programs over which they have authority (1) by utilizing, to the maximum extent possible, appropriate peer review groups established within the National Institutes of Health and composed principally of nonfederal scientists and other experts in the scientific and disease fields, and (2) when appropriate, by establishing, with the approval of the National Cancer Advisory Board and the director of the National Institutes of Health, other formal peer review groups as may be required. (b) The director of the National Cancer Institute shall, as soon as practicable after the end of each calendar year, prepare in consultation with the National Cancer Advisory Board and submit to the President for transmittal to the Congress a report on the activities, progress, and accomplishments under the National Cancer Program during the preceding calendar year and a plan for the program during the next five years. SEC. 410B. (a) There is established in the National Cancer Institute a National Cancer Advisory Board (hereinafter in this section referred to as the 'board') to be composed of twenty-three members as follows: (1) The secretary, the director of the Office of Science and Technology, the director of the National Institutes of Health, the chief medical officer of the Veterans' Administration (or their designee), and a medical officer designated by the secretary of defense shall be ex officio members of the board. (2) Eighteen members appointed by the President. Not more than twelve of the appointed members of the board shall be scientists or physicians and not more than eight of the appointed members shall be representatives from the general public. The scientists and physicians appointed to the board shall be appointed from persons who are among the leading scientific or medical authorities outstanding in the study, diagnosis, or treatment of cancer or in fields related thereto. Each appointed member of the board shall be appointed from among persons who by virtue of their training, experience, and background are especially qualified to appraise the programs of the National Cancer Institute. (b) (1) Appointed members shall be appointed for six-year terms, except that of the members of first appointed six shall be appointed for a term of two years, and six shall be appointed for a term of four years, as designated by the President at the time of appointment. (2) Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to expiration of the term for which their predecessor was appointed shall serve only for the remainder of such term. Appointed members shall be eligible for reappointment and may serve after the expiration of their terms until their successors have taken office. (3) A vacancy in the board shall not affect its activities, and twelve members thereof shall constitute a quorum. (4) The board shall supersede the existing National Advisory Cancer Council, and the appointed members of the council serving on the effective date of this section shall serve as additional members of the board for the duration of their terms then existing, or for such shorter time as the President may prescribe. (c) The President shall designate one of the appointed members to serve as chairman for a term of two years. (d) The board shall meet at the call of the director of the National Cancer Institute or the chairman, but not less often than four times a year and shall advise and assist the director of the National Cancer Institute with respect to the National Cancer Program. (e) The director of the National Cancer Institute shall designate a member of the staff of the institute to act as executive secretary of the board. (f) The board may hold such hearings, take such testimony, and sit and act at such times and places as the board deems advisable to investigate programs and activities of the National Cancer Program. (g) The board shall submit a report to the President for transmittal to the Congress not later than January 31 of each year on the progress of the National Cancer Program toward the accomplishment of its objectives. (h) Members of the board who are not officers or employees of the United States shall receive for each day they are engaged in the performance of the duties of the board compensation at rates not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate in effect for GS-18 of the General Schedule, including travel time; and all members, while so serving away from their homes or regular places of business, may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as such expenses are authorized by section 5703, title 5, United States Code, for person in the government service employed intermittently. (i) The director of the National Cancer Institute shall make available to the board such staff, information, and other assistance as it may require to carry out its activities. SEC. 410C. For the purpose of carrying out this part (other than section 409), there are authorized to be appropriated $400,000,000 for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1972; $500,000,000 for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1973; and $600,000,000 for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1974. (b) (1) Section 402 of the Public Health Service Act is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: (b) Under procedures approved by the director of the National Institutes of Health, the director of the National Cancer Institute may approve grants under this act for cancer research or training (1) in amounts not to exceed $35,000 after appropriate review for scientific merit but without the review and recommendation by the National Cancer Advisory Board prescribed by section 403 (c), and (2) in amounts exceeding $35,000 after appropriate review for scientific merit and recommendation for approval by such board as prescribed by section "403(c)." (2) Section 402 of such act is further amended: (A) by inserting "(a)" immediately after "Sec. 402."; and (B) by redesignating paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) as paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), and (7), respectively. (3) Secton 403(c) of such act is amended by striking out "In carrying out" and inserting in lieu thereof "Except as provided in section 402(b), in carrying out". SEC. 4. (a) The President shall carry out a review of all administrative processes under which the National Cancer Program, established under part A of title IV of the Public Health Service Act, will operate, including the processes of advisory council and peer group reviews, in order to assure the most expeditious accomplishment of the objectives of the program. Within one year of the date of enactment of this act the President shall submit a report to Congress of the findings of such review and the actions taken to facilitate the conduct of the program, together with recommendations for any needed legislative changes. (b) The President shall request of the Congress without delay such additional appropriations (including increased authorizations) as are required to pursue immediately any development in the National Cancer Program requiring prompt and expeditious support and for which regularly appropriated funds are not available. SEC. 5. Title IV of the Public Health Service Act is amended by adding after part F the following new part: SEC. 454. The director of the National Institutes of Health and the director of the National Cancer Institute shall be appointed by the President. Except as provided in section 407(b)(9), the director of the National Cancer Institute shall report directly to the director of the National Institutes of Health. SEC. 6. (a)( l ) Section 217 of the Public Health Service Act is amended: (A) by striking out "National Advisory Cancer Council," each place it occurs in subsection (a), and (B) by striking out "cancer," in subsections (a) and (b) of such section. (2) Sections 301(d), 301(i), 402, and 403(c) of such act are each amended by striking out "National Advisory Cancer Council" and inserting in lieu thereof "National Cancer Advisory Board". (3) Section 403(b) of such act is amended by striking out "National Cancer Advisory Council" and inserting in lieu thereof "National Cancer Advisory Board". (4) Section 404 of such act is amended: (A) by striking out "council" in the matter preceding paragraph (a) and inserting in lieu thereof "National Cancer Advisory Board", and (B) by striking out "COUNCIL" in the section heading and inserting in lieu thereof "BOARD". SEC. 7. (a) This act and the amendments made by this act shall take effect sixty days after the date of enactment of this act or on such prior date after the date of enactment of this act as the President shall prescribe and publish in the Federal Register. (b) The first sentence of section 454 of the Public Health Service Act (added by section 5 of this act) shall apply only with respect to appointments made after the effective date of this act (as prescribed by subsection (a)). (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), members of the National Cancer Advisory Board (authorized under section 410B of the Public Health Service Act, as added by this act) may be appointed, in the manner provided for in such section, at any time after the date of enactment of this act. Such officers shall be compensated from the date they first take office, at the rates provided for in such section 410B. Approved December 23, 1971
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NCI’s Role in Cancer Research - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/nci-role
txt:  How Cancer Research Works  Research Begins with Ideas  The Cancer Research Continuum  Technology and Collaboration Fuel Progress  NCI: The Largest Funder of Cancer Research  How Cancer Research Works Research Begins with Ideas The Cancer Research Continuum Technology and Collaboration Fuel Progress NCI: The Largest Funder of Cancer Research How Cancer Research Works When people think about cancer research, they may envision men and women in lab coats, carefully dripping substances into test tubes or peering thoughtfully into microscopes. Of course, those things do happen in biomedical research. But they are just one small part of a much larger research landscape. In reality, cancer research is a vast, complex enterprise that involves researchers from many different disciplines. It also relies heavily on the participation of patients and healthy volunteers, without whom cancer research would not be possible. Driving Discovery NCI drives the cancer research enterprise by supporting and convening researchers, paying for facilities and systems, coordinating the National Cancer Program, and more. Cancer research happens in many places, such as: the lab, with investigators studying the inner workings of cells  hospitals, with doctors administering treatments to patients as part of clinical trials  community clinics, with nurses or health educators teaching people how to reduce their cancer risk  universities and academic medical centers across the country and the world, where doctors, professors, fellows, and students unravel the complexity of cancer  the offices of NCI staff who analyze data to identify behaviors, exposures, or other factors that influence cancer risk or cancer outcomes  NCI program offices, where staff review applications from researchers across the country who are hoping to secure funding for their research projects  Research Begins with Ideas An idea. That’s the genesis of a cancer research study. It could be an idea for a large-scale project like The Cancer Genome Atlas, a multiyear effort that involved researchers from institutions across the country working collaboratively to catalogue all of the changes to DNA and molecules in more than 30 different cancer types. Or it could be something more modest, such as testing whether a text messaging service can help pregnant women quit smoking. Ideas for new cancer research studies are often inspired by findings from earlier research, research on other cancers, and even findings from research done on other diseases, such as diabetes or immune disorders. Findings from basic research, such as studies of cancer cells in the laboratory, can ultimately define research questions to study in humans, such as helping to identify drugs to test in clinical trials. And findings from clinical trials in humans can, conversely, generate hypotheses that need to be further investigated in cells or animal models in the lab. An epidemiologic study can help identify potential risk factors for certain cancers and generate hypotheses about what may cause some cancers or suggest possible preventive measures. It’s all part of a continuum of innovation and knowledge that produces important biomedical advances. Each advance builds on the next, and each advance spurs new ideas. The Cancer Research Continuum Although studies of new cancer treatments often receive the most headlines, cancer research involves much more than testing new therapies. Learning more about how to treat and prevent cancer entails the work of researchers from a wide range of disciplines, many of whom will never handle a frozen tissue sample or don a white lab coat or hospital scrubs. Generally, biomedical research falls into four categories, each of which is essential to advances in cancer research overall. Why do cancer cells grow and spread uncontrollably? What causes a cell to become cancerous in the first place? To answer basic research questions like these, investigators study bacteria, viruses, fungi, animal cells and human cells (both healthy and cancerous) grown in the lab, and tumors in animals, such as mice and rats. Basic research increases our knowledge and understanding of nature and its laws. This type of research can be driven by curiosity, often without regard to practical applications. However, basic research is the foundation for solving many practical and important problems. It provides the raw materials for tomorrow’s scientific and technical advances. Some examples of basic research in cancer biology might include: defining the communication pathways in cells that regulate processes such as cell proliferation and the repair of damaged DNA  analyzing how healthy cells respond to injury from a suspected cancer-causing toxin  analyzing how cancer cells and malignant tumors growing in animals respond to an investigational drug  detailing the physical structure of a protein receptor commonly found on the surface of cancer cells, which may aid in developing drugs that target the protein  determining the biological differences between immune system cells that attack and kill cancer cells and those that ignore them  Basic research requires painstaking attention to detail and often involves an iterative approach, meaning that individual projects can often span periods of months or years. But without basic research, it would be impossible to develop new ways to prevent and treat cancer. Basic research is the foundation on which much of the cancer research continuum is built. Nearly every new treatment, test, or intervention for cancer must be rigorously tested in clinical trials to be sure that it is safe and effective before it can be used routinely in humans. In clinical trials, researchers test drugs, medical devices, or other interventions in human volunteers, with the goal of improving all aspects of patient care. Trials are used to find answers to many different clinical questions, such as: Can a new (or old) drug prevent cancer in people at increased risk of the disease (such as those with certain genetic mutations or a family history of a specific cancer)?  Does a new screening test reduce deaths from the cancer that it is meant to detect?  Can taking a drug or making a lifestyle change (e.g., exercise, diet) after treatment extend the lives of patients with cancer?  Which of two commonly used treatments for the same cancer is more effective or safer?  Can a new drug or intervention improve patients’ quality of life?  Initial, or early-phase, clinical trials of a potential new therapy are very small, with just a handful of participants, and are conducted primarily to determine whether a new treatment is safe and to identify the best dose to test in larger trials. Later-phase clinical trials, which often take several years or more to conduct, often involve hundreds or thousands of patients. These trials are used to determine whether a treatment is more effective and/or better tolerated than current treatments and should be used more broadly. Increasingly, additional studies (often called correlative studies) are built into clinical trials. These additional studies are intended to help researchers better understand issues such as why some patients in the trial did or didn’t respond to a new treatment or how treatments affect patients’ quality of life. Studying populations of people—their family histories and genetics, health behaviors and health histories, and environmental exposures—can provide important information about the causes of cancer and its consequences. Are any risk factors (e.g., gene mutations, environmental exposures) common among people who develop a certain kind of cancer? After completing treatment for cancer, what was the state of the emotional and psychological well-being of the population studied? Often, these types of questions can only be answered by studying large groups of people. Population studies can involve: mining data from cancer registries and databases (such as NCI’s SEER registry, one of the largest of its kind in the world)  studies of large families in which the same cancer was diagnosed in multiple members or registries of families with hereditary cancers  observational studies, including case-control and cohort studies  comprehensive surveys of specific population groups  Population-based research can identify associations or highlight trends that would be difficult or impossible to find otherwise. Important data about disparities in diagnosis or survival rates among certain racial or socioeconomic groups or the long-term health of pediatric cancer survivors, for instance, only came to light as a result of population-based research. The results of basic and clinical research or population studies don’t exist in a vacuum. Some form the basis for interventions—for example, a new treatment or a strategy for improving use of a proven therapy—that are tested to determine whether they can improve health outcomes. And if those studies suggest that an intervention can improve health outcomes, additional research is often needed to assess how it’s being used outside of a controlled study like a clinical trial or to test ways to overcomes barriers to its use in everyday clinical practice. This type of research is often called translational research. In the context of medicine, it is often called bench to bedside or bedside to practice (also called “implementation research”). Because it is so broad, translational research often overlaps with the other areas of research. Clinical trials, for example, are considered by many researchers to be a critical component of translational research. Regardless, the ultimate goal of translational research is to help ensure that findings from earlier studies with the potential to affect clinical care are tested and, if shown to be effective, are eventually incorporated into everyday care in the most effective and efficient means possible. Although these different areas of research are distinct in many ways, they also have something in common: they are often performed over a period of years and, in some cases, decades. To take a finding in basic research, such as identifying a mutant protein that drives a particular cancer, and develop a drug that inactivates the protein and performs well in cells in the lab and in animal models can take years, if not decades. Even once a drug makes it to late-phase clinical trials, patients must be followed for several years, or even a decade or more, to determine whether the new treatment is more effective than current treatments. And, in population-based studies, researchers typically collect a substantial amount of data on the groups being studied and often follow them (via interviews, surveys, medical records, etc.) for many years. Technology and Collaboration Fuel Progress Cancer researchers are increasingly using advanced technologies that are capable of providing far more information and detail than was previously possible, propelling the shift toward precision medicine. Some of these technologies include: next-generation DNA sequencing and gene and protein array platforms, which allow researchers to perform more comprehensive molecular analyses of tumors, more quickly and accurately, than was possible with older technology  advanced imaging technologies that allow researchers to obtain biopsy samples with more precision or measure the inner workings of cancer cells and their microenvironments  new bioinformatics tools for storing and analyzing the large amounts of data captured in the course of much cancer research today  And cancer research now involves collaborative efforts from researchers in disciplines such as physics, advanced mathematics, structural biology, nanotechnology, and many more, who have introduced new concepts and approaches to studying cancer. There is also greater collaboration among the chief funders of cancer research: the government, the private sector, and nonprofit organizations. This collaboration is allowing patients and advocates to become more involved in guiding and developing studies and allowing researchers to overcome issues related to intellectual property that can sometimes stall or halt important research projects. NCI: The Largest Funder of Cancer Research NCI is the largest funder of cancer research in the world. The institute’s annual budget, which is set by Congress, is approximately $6.9 billion. These funds support the infrastructure that sustains cancer research performed at NCI and at cancer centers, hospitals, community clinics, and universities across the United States and around the world. NCI has a number of divisions and centers that either conduct research or manage research programs. The NCI intramural program is carried out by both government and contract staff, who conduct research at one of several campuses in suburban Maryland. Intramural research spans the research continuum. The bulk of NCI’s budget supports the extramural program—the investigators and institutions across the country who use federal funds to conduct cancer research. The extramural program includes: independent investigators at universities and academic medical centers who work on basic and clinical research  special programs focused on specific research areas, such as genomics and health disparities.  the NCI-designated Cancer Centers program  the National Clinical Trials Network and other research networks  A summary of NCI’s expenditures for fiscal year 2022, as well as funding policies related to research grant awards. In both the intramural and extramural programs, NCI conducts and supports research on rare cancers. This work is an important part of NCI’s mission and allows the institute to support research into cancers not typically of interest to the private sector. As a federal agency, NCI is able to study interventions and drugs that also might not be of interest to the private sector, for instance because they are no longer under patent protection or they are not anticipated to be profitable. Like other components of the federal government, NCI must operate within the confines of its budget. Because medical inflation has outpaced general inflation and NCI has had a relatively flat budget over much of the last decade, the institute’s purchasing power has declined substantially. NCI senior leadership has worked closely with its advisory boards to make difficult choices about funding, including whether to fund a project or program at all or adjust their funding levels. Decisions about funding are heavily influenced by the areas of research considered by NCI leadership and its advisory boards to be the highest priority and have the greatest potential to produce important advances and improve patients’ lives.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Senior Leadership - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/leadership
txt: Director, National Cancer Institute Principal Deputy Director, National Cancer Institute Deputy Director, Clinical & Translational Research
Director, Division of Cancer Treatment & Diagnosis Acting Deputy Director for Management, Office of ManagementActing Executive Officer Deputy Director, Scientific Strategy & Development Special Advisor to the Director for Childhood Cancer Chief of Staff Director, Center for Cancer Training Director, Division of Cancer Prevention Director, Division of Cancer Epidemiology & Genetics Director, Office of Cancer Centers Director, Technology Transfer Center  Director, Division of Cancer Biology Director, Office of Communications & Public Liaison Director, Division of Cancer Control & Population Sciences Director, Center for Global Health Director, Division of Extramural Activities  NCI Clinical Director within the Center for Cancer Research  Deputy Director, Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis Associate Director, Translational Research Program  Director, Center for Biomedical Informatics & Information Technology Acting Director, NCI Frederick Office of Scientific Operations Scientific Director for Basic Research, Center for Cancer Research Director, Center for Cancer Research Director, Center for Research Strategy Director, Coordinating Center for Clinical Trials Director, Office of Cancer Clinical Proteomics Research Clinical Director, Division of Cancer Epidemiology & Genetics Chief Information Officer Director, Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities Director, Center for Cancer Genomics Director, Small Business Innovation Research & Small Business Technology Transfer Programs Director, Office of HIV & AIDS Malignancy
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Questions to Ask About Treatment - Rare Brain & Spine Tumor Network - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/rare-brain-spine-tumor/living/questions/treatment
txt: Radiation Oncologist Dr. Kevin Camphausen is helping people with brain and spine tumors by developing drugs that can enhance the impact of radiation treatment. Here are some questions to ask your doctor to help you decide on the best treatment for you. What treatments (chemotherapy, immunotherapy, targeted therapy, surgery, etc.) are available for my tumor type?  What is the standard treatment for my tumor type? If there are not standard guidelines, what treatment options would you recommend for my tumor type and why?  What are the benefits and risks of each treatment option?  If my treatment requires a specialist, such as a neurosurgeon or neuroradiologist, could you recommend one?  Are there clinical trials available for my tumor type? If so, where can I find clinical trial information?  When do I need to make a treatment decision? And when would I start treatment?  How long will I be on the treatment?  How will the treatment be administered (orally, intravenously, or via another form)?  Where will I receive treatment?  How will you know if the treatment is working? If the treatment is not working, are there other options?  How often do you recommend I have imaging tests?  What are common treatment symptoms or side effects?  How do you manage treatment symptoms or side effects?  Are there long-term effects of the treatment?  Can I work and carry on with my normal activities during treatment?  What symptoms or side effects do I need to report? And what is the best way to report them?  How do I contact your team if I have treatment-related questions during the day, night, or weekends?  Will insurance cover the treatment?  If I want a second opinion, whom do you recommend I see?  Can you recommend online educational resources where I can read more information about treatments?  We encourage you to print these questions and bring them with you to your appointment.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/cam/patient/prostate-supplements-pdq
txt:  Introduction  Overview of CAM Use in Prostate Cancer  Calcium: Questions and Answers  Green Tea: Questions and Answers  Lycopene: Questions and Answers  Modified Citrus Pectin: Questions and Answers  Pomegranate: Questions and Answers  Selenium: Questions and Answers  Soy: Questions and Answers  Vitamin D: Questions and Answers  Vitamin E: Questions and Answers  Combination Therapies  Other Prostate Health Supplements  About This PDQ Summary  General CAM Information  Evaluation of CAM Therapies  Questions to Ask Your Health Care Provider About CAM  To Learn More About CAM  Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) is a form of treatment  used in addition to (complementary) or instead of (alternative) standard treatments. In the United States, about 1 out of every 8 men  will be diagnosed with prostate cancer. It is the most second-most common cancer in men in the United States. CAM use among men with prostate cancer is common. Studies of why men with prostate cancer decide to use CAM show that their choice is based on medical history,  beliefs about the safety and side effects of CAM compared to standard treatments, and a need to feel in control of their treatment. CAM treatments used  by men with prostate cancer include certain foods, dietary supplements, herbs, vitamins, and minerals. Different types of research have been done to study the use of CAM in prostate cancer. These study types include the following: Combined study: A combined study analyzes data from more than one study done on the same topic, such as the response to a dietary supplement, risk of getting cancer, or treatment of cancer. The results of a combined study are usually stronger than the results of any study by itself. A combined study is also called a meta-analysis. Population study: A population study looks at a group of people who are part of the general population and share a common characteristic, such as age, sex, or health condition. This group of people may be studied for different reasons, such as their response to a dietary supplement or risk of getting cancer. A population study is also called an epidemiologic study. Clinical trial: A clinical trial looks at how well new medical approaches work in people. These studies may test new methods of screening, prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of cancer. Clinical trials with a small number of people or when the treatment is not randomly assigned are not included in this summary. See the clinical trial sections of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements for information on clinical trials done using nutrients or supplements. Laboratory and animal studies: In laboratory studies, tumor cells are used to test a substance to find out if it is likely to have any anticancer effects. In animal studies, tests are done to see if a drug, procedure, or treatment is safe and effective in animals. Laboratory and animal studies are done before a substance is tested in people. CAM treatments have been studied to see if their use lowers the risk of prostate cancer, kills prostate cancer cells, or lowers the risk that cancer will come back after treatment. Most of these studies used prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels to find out whether the treatment worked. This is a weaker measure of how well the treatment works than direct measures, such as fewer new cases of prostate cancer, or smaller tumor size or lower rate of recurrence after treatment for prostate cancer. This  PDQ summary has sections about the use of specific foods and dietary supplements to prevent or treat prostate cancer: Calcium Green Tea Lycopene Modified Citrus Pectin Pomegranate Selenium Soy Vitamin D Vitamin E Combination Therapies Other Prostate Health Supplements Each section includes the following information for each food or dietary supplement: How it is given or taken. Results of studies done in people. Side effects or risks. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) information. Studies of CAM use to treat  prostate cancer have shown the following: Men who have prostate cancer are more likely to take dietary supplements and eat certain foods than men who do not have prostate cancer. Men who have prostate cancer and who have healthy eating habits (for example, eating lots of fish rich in omega-3 fatty acids and vegetables) are more likely to take dietary supplements. Men who have prostate cancer use CAM treatments to help boost the immune system, improve quality of life,  and lower the risk of the cancer  coming back, but only half of them tell their doctors about their use of CAM. Studies of CAM use  to lower prostate cancer risk or to prevent it from coming back have shown the following: A study of men with a family history of prostate cancer found that over half used vitamins or other dietary supplements for prostate health or to prevent cancer. A study of men at a  prostate cancer screening clinic found that over half took multivitamins and some took herbal supplements. A study of prostate cancer survivors found that up to one-third took vitamins or minerals. See the PDQ summary on Prostate Cancer Prevention for
		  more information on prostate cancer prevention. Current Clinical Trials What is calcium?Calcium is a common mineral in the body that is needed  to help blood vessels, muscles, and nerves work  to send signals from cell to cell, and to release hormones. The body stores most calcium in bones and teeth. How is calcium given or taken?The main sources of calcium are in foods and dietary supplements. About one-third of dietary calcium  comes from milk and milk products like cheese  and yogurt. Vegetable sources  include Chinese cabbage, kale, and broccoli. Foods may have calcium added, such as fruit juices and drinks, tofu, and cereals. Most research about calcium and prostate cancer risk has studied calcium in the diet and not calcium in supplements. Have any laboratory or animal studies
         been done using calcium?For information on laboratory and animal studies done using calcium, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Have any  studies of calcium been done in people?Studies  of people in many parts of the world have been done to find out if there is a link between dairy products, calcium, and prostate cancer risk. The results of these studies have been mixed. Some studies have shown that calcium has an effect on the overall risk of developing prostate cancer or on stopping cancer from coming back after treatment, and others have not. Several studies have suggested that eating a large amount of calcium may increase the risk of advanced and metastatic prostate cancer.Combined studiesA 2005 review found a possible link between an increased risk of prostate cancer and a diet high in dairy products and calcium. A  review of studies published between 1996 and 2006 found that milk and dairy products in the diet increased the risk of prostate cancer.A 2008 review of 45 studies found no link  between  dairy products and the risk of prostate cancer.A 2013 review for  the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force found that taking vitamin D and/or calcium supplements showed no overall effect on  rates of cancer or deaths from cancer, including prostate cancer.A 2015 review of 32 studies found that high amounts of milk, low-fat milk, cheese, total dietary calcium, and dairy calcium in the diet may increase the risk of prostate cancer. Calcium supplements and non-dairy calcium were not linked with an increased risk of prostate cancer. Population studiesPopulation studies of   dairy products, dietary calcium, and prostate cancer risk have shown mixed results. Age, body mass index (BMI), and other nutrients in dairy products may affect study results.Clinical trialsIn a randomized clinical trial reported in 2005, men were given calcium or a placebo for 4 years and were followed for 12 years. During the first 6 years of the study, there were fewer  cases of prostate cancer in the calcium group than in the  placebo group. But after 10 years, there was no difference in the number of prostate cancers between the two groups. Is calcium approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
         for use as a cancer treatment in the United States?The FDA has not approved the use of  calcium as a treatment for cancer.The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of calcium supplements may not be the same. Calcium is a common mineral in the body that is needed  to help blood vessels, muscles, and nerves work  to send signals from cell to cell, and to release hormones. The body stores most calcium in bones and teeth. The main sources of calcium are in foods and dietary supplements. About one-third of dietary calcium  comes from milk and milk products like cheese  and yogurt. Vegetable sources  include Chinese cabbage, kale, and broccoli. Foods may have calcium added, such as fruit juices and drinks, tofu, and cereals. Most research about calcium and prostate cancer risk has studied calcium in the diet and not calcium in supplements. For information on laboratory and animal studies done using calcium, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Studies  of people in many parts of the world have been done to find out if there is a link between dairy products, calcium, and prostate cancer risk. The results of these studies have been mixed. Some studies have shown that calcium has an effect on the overall risk of developing prostate cancer or on stopping cancer from coming back after treatment, and others have not. Several studies have suggested that eating a large amount of calcium may increase the risk of advanced and metastatic prostate cancer. Combined studies A 2005 review found a possible link between an increased risk of prostate cancer and a diet high in dairy products and calcium. A  review of studies published between 1996 and 2006 found that milk and dairy products in the diet increased the risk of prostate cancer. A 2008 review of 45 studies found no link  between  dairy products and the risk of prostate cancer. A 2013 review for  the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force found that taking vitamin D and/or calcium supplements showed no overall effect on  rates of cancer or deaths from cancer, including prostate cancer. A 2015 review of 32 studies found that high amounts of milk, low-fat milk, cheese, total dietary calcium, and dairy calcium in the diet may increase the risk of prostate cancer. Calcium supplements and non-dairy calcium were not linked with an increased risk of prostate cancer. Population studies Population studies of   dairy products, dietary calcium, and prostate cancer risk have shown mixed results. Age, body mass index (BMI), and other nutrients in dairy products may affect study results. Clinical trials In a randomized clinical trial reported in 2005, men were given calcium or a placebo for 4 years and were followed for 12 years. During the first 6 years of the study, there were fewer  cases of prostate cancer in the calcium group than in the  placebo group. But after 10 years, there was no difference in the number of prostate cancers between the two groups. The FDA has not approved the use of  calcium as a treatment for cancer. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of calcium supplements may not be the same. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. Current Clinical Trials What is green tea?
 Tea comes from the Camellia sinensis plant. The way tea leaves are processed determines whether green tea, black tea, or oolong tea is made. Green tea is made by steaming and drying the leaves.The health benefits studied in green tea are thought to be from  compounds called polyphenols. Polyphenols are a group of plant chemicals that include catechins         (antioxidants that help protect cells from damage). Catechins make up most of the polyphenols in green tea and vary based on the source of the tea leaves and how they are processed. This makes it hard to identify most of the chemical factors linked to the health benefits of green tea.  Some studies have suggested that green tea may protect against heart and blood vessel disease. How is green tea  given or taken?
People usually drink green tea or take it as a dietary supplement. Have any laboratory or animal studies
         been done using green tea?For information on laboratory and animal studies done using green tea, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Have any  studies of green tea been done in people?
Population studies and clinical trials have been done to find out if green tea  can prevent or treat prostate cancer. Results have been mixed; some studies have shown a short-term decrease in prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level or a lower risk of having prostate cancer, and others have not. There is not enough evidence to know whether green tea can prevent or treat prostate cancer.Population studiesOverall, population studies suggest that green tea may help protect against prostate cancer in Asian populations. Prostate cancer deaths in Asia are among the lowest in the world. Clinical trialsIn two randomized clinical trials in men at high risk of prostate cancer (high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia [HGPIN]), those treated with green tea catechins had lower rates of prostate cancer than those treated with a placebo.  A 2017 randomized clinical trial in men with HGPIN found that those treated with green tea catechins for 1 year had decreased PSA levels, though no decrease in rates of prostate cancer, compared  with the placebo group. Overall, findings suggest that green tea catechins lower PSA levels and may lower the risk of prostate cancer in men at high risk for the disease. However, these clinical trials were limited to small numbers of people, and it is not clear if the benefits reported were from green tea. Have any side effects or risks been reported from green tea?A trial of oral green tea extract in patients with solid tumors reported that drinking 7 to 8 Japanese-style cups (equal to 3 ½ to 4 cups U.S.) of tea 3 times a day for 6 months was a safe dose. Clinical trials have reported on the safety of long-term use of green tea to prevent prostate cancer. In a United States trial,  men at risk of prostate cancer were given green tea extract or a placebo for 1 year. There were more side effects in the   group who received the green tea extract than in the group who received the placebo.In safety studies of green tea for men with prostate cancer, short-term green tea use for up to 90 days was well tolerated. One study found  that the most reported side effects of green tea were headache, chest pain, or gastrointestinal symptoms, such as nausea and diarrhea. These were mild except for two reports of trouble breathing and severe anorexia. In men with advanced prostate cancer, side effects reported include insomnia, confusion, and fatigue. In rare cases, liver problems have occurred. Is green tea approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
         for use as a cancer treatment in the United States?
The FDA has not approved the use of  green tea as a treatment for cancer or any other medical condition.The FDA Division of Drug Oncology Products recommends that green tea extract be taken with food by participants in clinical trials and that frequent liver function tests   be considered during treatment, especially in the first few months of starting a clinical trial.
Green tea is available in the United States in food products and dietary supplements. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of green tea supplements may not be the same. Tea comes from the Camellia sinensis plant. The way tea leaves are processed determines whether green tea, black tea, or oolong tea is made. Green tea is made by steaming and drying the leaves. The health benefits studied in green tea are thought to be from  compounds called polyphenols. Polyphenols are a group of plant chemicals that include catechins         (antioxidants that help protect cells from damage). Catechins make up most of the polyphenols in green tea and vary based on the source of the tea leaves and how they are processed. This makes it hard to identify most of the chemical factors linked to the health benefits of green tea. Some studies have suggested that green tea may protect against heart and blood vessel disease. People usually drink green tea or take it as a dietary supplement. For information on laboratory and animal studies done using green tea, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Population studies and clinical trials have been done to find out if green tea  can prevent or treat prostate cancer. Results have been mixed; some studies have shown a short-term decrease in prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level or a lower risk of having prostate cancer, and others have not. There is not enough evidence to know whether green tea can prevent or treat prostate cancer. Population studies Overall, population studies suggest that green tea may help protect against prostate cancer in Asian populations. Prostate cancer deaths in Asia are among the lowest in the world. Clinical trials In two randomized clinical trials in men at high risk of prostate cancer (high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia [HGPIN]), those treated with green tea catechins had lower rates of prostate cancer than those treated with a placebo.  A 2017 randomized clinical trial in men with HGPIN found that those treated with green tea catechins for 1 year had decreased PSA levels, though no decrease in rates of prostate cancer, compared  with the placebo group. Overall, findings suggest that green tea catechins lower PSA levels and may lower the risk of prostate cancer in men at high risk for the disease. However, these clinical trials were limited to small numbers of people, and it is not clear if the benefits reported were from green tea. A trial of oral green tea extract in patients with solid tumors reported that drinking 7 to 8 Japanese-style cups (equal to 3 ½ to 4 cups U.S.) of tea 3 times a day for 6 months was a safe dose. Clinical trials have reported on the safety of long-term use of green tea to prevent prostate cancer. In a United States trial,  men at risk of prostate cancer were given green tea extract or a placebo for 1 year. There were more side effects in the   group who received the green tea extract than in the group who received the placebo. In safety studies of green tea for men with prostate cancer, short-term green tea use for up to 90 days was well tolerated. One study found  that the most reported side effects of green tea were headache, chest pain, or gastrointestinal symptoms, such as nausea and diarrhea. These were mild except for two reports of trouble breathing and severe anorexia. In men with advanced prostate cancer, side effects reported include insomnia, confusion, and fatigue. In rare cases, liver problems have occurred. The FDA has not approved the use of  green tea as a treatment for cancer or any other medical condition. The FDA Division of Drug Oncology Products recommends that green tea extract be taken with food by participants in clinical trials and that frequent liver function tests   be considered during treatment, especially in the first few months of starting a clinical trial. Green tea is available in the United States in food products and dietary supplements. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of green tea supplements may not be the same. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. Current Clinical Trials What is lycopene?
Lycopene is a carotenoid (a natural red color made by plants). It mixes with  or dissolves in fats.          Lycopene protects plants from light-related stress and helps them use  the energy of the sun to make nutrients. Lycopene is found in  fruits and vegetables like tomatoes, apricots, guavas, and watermelons.The main source of lycopene in the United States is tomato-based products. Lycopene is easier for the body to use when it is eaten in processed tomato products like tomato paste and tomato puree than in raw tomatoes.  Lycopene has been studied for its role in  the prevention of heart and blood vessel disease. How is lycopene given or taken?
     
    Lycopene may be eaten in food or taken in dietary supplements. Have any laboratory or animal studies
         been done using lycopene?
For information on laboratory and animal studies done using lycopene, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Have any  studies of lycopene been done in people?Population studies and clinical trials have been done to find out if lycopene can prevent or treat prostate cancer. Clinical trials have shown mixed results; some studies have shown a lower risk of prostate cancer or a decrease in prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level, and others have not. There is not enough evidence to know whether lycopene can prevent or treat prostate cancer.Population and combined studies
Some population studies in men have found that high amounts of lycopene in the diet are linked with a lower risk of prostate cancer. Some studies have shown that lycopene levels in the blood and tissue of people with cancer are lower than in those who do not have cancer. However, other studies have not shown this.Reviews done in 2015 and 2017 of combined  studies analyzed lycopene in the diet and lycopene levels in the blood.  Both reviews found that higher lycopene intake and  higher  blood levels of lycopene  were linked    with lower  prostate cancer risk.A 2006 study done in men who took part in the National Cancer Institute's Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial found no  link between lycopene and tomatoes in the diet and prostate cancer risk in men with no family history of prostate cancer. However, in men with a family history of the disease, higher amounts of lycopene in the diet were linked with a lower risk of prostate cancer.  Sources and types of lycopene, types of diets, genetic risk factors, obesity, tobacco and alcohol use, and other factors, may play a part in mixed study results. Most research has studied the effects of  lycopene on  the risk of all prostate cancers, and has not  studied effects of lycopene on low-grade prostate cancer compared with  high-grade prostate cancer.There are other trials of combination therapies that include lycopene in the Combination Therapies section of this summary. Have any side effects or risks been reported from lycopene?Lycopene has been given in many clinical trials with  very few side effects. Side effects, such as diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, bloating, increased gas, and stomach irritation have been reported. In one study, symptoms went away when lycopene was taken with meals. Is lycopene approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
         for use to prevent or treat cancer in the United States?The FDA has not approved the use of lycopene as a treatment for cancer or any other medical condition.Lycopene is deemed Generally Recognized as Safe by the FDA.Lycopene is available in the United States in food products and dietary supplements. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of lycopene supplements may not be the same. Lycopene is a carotenoid (a natural red color made by plants). It mixes with  or dissolves in fats.          Lycopene protects plants from light-related stress and helps them use  the energy of the sun to make nutrients. Lycopene is found in  fruits and vegetables like tomatoes, apricots, guavas, and watermelons. The main source of lycopene in the United States is tomato-based products. Lycopene is easier for the body to use when it is eaten in processed tomato products like tomato paste and tomato puree than in raw tomatoes. Lycopene has been studied for its role in  the prevention of heart and blood vessel disease. Lycopene may be eaten in food or taken in dietary supplements. For information on laboratory and animal studies done using lycopene, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Population studies and clinical trials have been done to find out if lycopene can prevent or treat prostate cancer. Clinical trials have shown mixed results; some studies have shown a lower risk of prostate cancer or a decrease in prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level, and others have not. There is not enough evidence to know whether lycopene can prevent or treat prostate cancer. Population and combined studies Some population studies in men have found that high amounts of lycopene in the diet are linked with a lower risk of prostate cancer. Some studies have shown that lycopene levels in the blood and tissue of people with cancer are lower than in those who do not have cancer. However, other studies have not shown this. Reviews done in 2015 and 2017 of combined  studies analyzed lycopene in the diet and lycopene levels in the blood.  Both reviews found that higher lycopene intake and  higher  blood levels of lycopene  were linked    with lower  prostate cancer risk. A 2006 study done in men who took part in the National Cancer Institute's Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial found no  link between lycopene and tomatoes in the diet and prostate cancer risk in men with no family history of prostate cancer. However, in men with a family history of the disease, higher amounts of lycopene in the diet were linked with a lower risk of prostate cancer. Sources and types of lycopene, types of diets, genetic risk factors, obesity, tobacco and alcohol use, and other factors, may play a part in mixed study results. Most research has studied the effects of  lycopene on  the risk of all prostate cancers, and has not  studied effects of lycopene on low-grade prostate cancer compared with  high-grade prostate cancer. There are other trials of combination therapies that include lycopene in the Combination Therapies section of this summary. Lycopene has been given in many clinical trials with  very few side effects. Side effects, such as diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, bloating, increased gas, and stomach irritation have been reported. In one study, symptoms went away when lycopene was taken with meals. The FDA has not approved the use of lycopene as a treatment for cancer or any other medical condition. Lycopene is deemed Generally Recognized as Safe by the FDA. Lycopene is available in the United States in food products and dietary supplements. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of lycopene supplements may not be the same. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. Current Clinical Trials What is modified citrus pectin?
Pectin is a substance made of small sugar molecules that are linked together. Pectin is found in the cell wall of most plants and has gel-like qualities that are useful in making  many types of  food and medicine.Citrus pectin is found in the peel and pulp of citrus fruits such as oranges, grapefruit, lemons, and limes.  Citrus pectin can be modified (changed) during manufacturing so that it can be dissolved in water and absorbed by the body. This changed citrus pectin is called modified citrus pectin (MCP). How is MCP given or taken?

     
    MCP may be taken by mouth in powder or capsule form. Have any laboratory or animal studies
         been done using MCP?
For information on laboratory and animal studies done using MCP, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Have any  studies
         of MCP been done in people?
Few studies have been done in   men with prostate cancer. There is not enough evidence to know whether MCP has any effect on prostate cancer. Have any side effects or risks been reported from MCP?
Side effects that have been reported include itching, stomach upset, abdominal cramps, increased gas, and diarrhea. Is MCP approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
         for use to prevent or treat  cancer in the United States?
The FDA has not approved the use of MCP as a treatment for cancer or any other medical condition.MCP is available in the United States in food products and dietary supplements. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of MCP supplements may not be the same. Pectin is a substance made of small sugar molecules that are linked together. Pectin is found in the cell wall of most plants and has gel-like qualities that are useful in making  many types of  food and medicine. Citrus pectin is found in the peel and pulp of citrus fruits such as oranges, grapefruit, lemons, and limes.  Citrus pectin can be modified (changed) during manufacturing so that it can be dissolved in water and absorbed by the body. This changed citrus pectin is called modified citrus pectin (MCP). MCP may be taken by mouth in powder or capsule form. For information on laboratory and animal studies done using MCP, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Few studies have been done in   men with prostate cancer. There is not enough evidence to know whether MCP has any effect on prostate cancer. Side effects that have been reported include itching, stomach upset, abdominal cramps, increased gas, and diarrhea. The FDA has not approved the use of MCP as a treatment for cancer or any other medical condition. MCP is available in the United States in food products and dietary supplements. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of MCP supplements may not be the same. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. Current Clinical Trials What is pomegranate?
The pomegranate is a fruit grown in Asia and in the Mediterranean, East Indies, Africa, and the United States. Pomegranate has been used as medicine for hundreds of years.The pomegranate is made up of the following:The peel, which  makes up half the fruit and contains polyphenols and minerals.The seeds.The aril (the layer between the peel and the seeds), which contains phenolics and flavonoids including anthocyanins, which give the pomegranate fruit and juice a red color. How is pomegranate given or taken?

     
    Pomegranate fruit and juice may be taken as food, drink, or a dietary supplement. Have any laboratory or animal studies
         been done using pomegranate? For information on laboratory and animal studies done using pomegranate, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Have any   studies of pomegranate been done in people?In a 2015 study, 183 men with recurrent prostate cancer were randomly assigned to receive either pomegranate juice, pomegranate extract, or a placebo. The study found no difference in how fast the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level rose between the 3 groups. There is not enough evidence to know whether pomegranate can prevent or treat prostate cancer. Have any side effects or risks been reported from pomegranate?
No serious side effects have been reported from the use of pomegranate. Is pomegranate approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
         for use to prevent or treat cancer  in the United States?The FDA has not approved the use of pomegranate as a treatment for cancer or any other medical condition.
Pomegranate is available in the United States in food products and dietary supplements. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of pomegranate supplements may not be the same. The pomegranate is a fruit grown in Asia and in the Mediterranean, East Indies, Africa, and the United States. Pomegranate has been used as medicine for hundreds of years. The pomegranate is made up of the following: The peel, which  makes up half the fruit and contains polyphenols and minerals. The seeds. The aril (the layer between the peel and the seeds), which contains phenolics and flavonoids including anthocyanins, which give the pomegranate fruit and juice a red color. Pomegranate fruit and juice may be taken as food, drink, or a dietary supplement. For information on laboratory and animal studies done using pomegranate, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. In a 2015 study, 183 men with recurrent prostate cancer were randomly assigned to receive either pomegranate juice, pomegranate extract, or a placebo. The study found no difference in how fast the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level rose between the 3 groups. There is not enough evidence to know whether pomegranate can prevent or treat prostate cancer. No serious side effects have been reported from the use of pomegranate. The FDA has not approved the use of pomegranate as a treatment for cancer or any other medical condition. Pomegranate is available in the United States in food products and dietary supplements. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of pomegranate supplements may not be the same. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. Current Clinical Trials What is selenium?
Selenium is a mineral that is essential to people in tiny amounts. Selenium is needed for many body functions, including reproduction and immunity. Food sources of selenium include meat, vegetables, and nuts. The amount of selenium found in the food depends on the  amount of selenium in the soil where the food grows. Selenium is stored  in the thyroid gland, liver, pancreas, pituitary gland, and kidneys.
Selenium may play a role in many diseases, including cancer. Results of the large National Cancer Institute-sponsored Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT) suggest that men with prostate cancer should not take selenium supplements. How is selenium given or taken?

     
    Selenium may be eaten in food or taken in dietary  supplements. Have any laboratory or animal studies
         been done using selenium? For information on laboratory and animal studies done using selenium, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Have any  studies of selenium been done in people?
Population studies and clinical trials have been done to find out if selenium can prevent or treat prostate cancer. The results of these studies have been mixed, but the results of a large, randomized clinical trial showed selenium had no effect on preventing prostate cancer.Combined studiesA review of 15 studies found that blood selenium levels and levels of selenium measured in toenail clippings were linked to a decreased risk of prostate cancer.Population studiesOne study tracking men for up to 10 years found that those who had high levels of selenium in  their blood had a  lower risk of prostate cancer. However, a 2009 study found that  men with high selenium levels were at greater risk of being diagnosed with aggressive prostate cancer. These differences may be due to genetic factors.The Health Professionals Follow-Up Study included 4,459 men with prostate cancer that had not spread to other parts of the body. The study found that taking selenium supplements after diagnosis may increase the risk of death from prostate cancer. The study investigators recommended that men with prostate cancer use caution in taking selenium supplements.The Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT) SELECT was a large clinical trial begun by the National Cancer Institute in 2001 to find out whether selenium and/or vitamin E could help prevent prostate cancer when taken as dietary supplements. Over 35,000 men, aged 50 years and older, were randomly assigned  to receive one of the following combinations daily for 7 to 12 years:Vitamin E and a placebo.Selenium and a placebo.Vitamin E and selenium.Two placebos.Early results of SELECT reported in 2009 found no difference in the rate of prostate cancer among the 4 groups. In the selenium alone group, there was a slight increase in the rate of diabetes mellitus. Even though this change was not clearly shown to be due to the supplement, the men in the study were advised to stop taking the study supplements. Updated results of SELECT in 2011 showed that  selenium supplements had no effect on prostate cancer  risk.In 2014, further results of SELECT showed that selenium supplements in men with low selenium levels at the start of the trial had  no effect on prostate cancer risk. However, selenium supplements in men who had high levels of selenium at the start of the trial increased the risk of aggressive prostate cancer.A study of 1,434 men in SELECT suggested that changes in certain genes which  control the way selenium is used by the body may have an effect on the risk of prostate cancer.Several factors may have affected study results, including the dose of vitamin E and the form of selenium used. The authors concluded that men should avoid selenium at doses that are higher than the recommended dietary intake. Have any side effects or risks of selenium supplements been reported?
Selenium supplements have been well tolerated in many clinical trials. But, in the SELECT trial, the use of selenium supplements was linked with a slight  increase in  the rate of diabetes mellitus. In several large studies, men with high selenium levels were at greater risk of being diagnosed with aggressive prostate cancer or dying from prostate cancer. Is selenium approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
         for use as a cancer treatment in the United States?The FDA has not approved the use of selenium supplements for the treatment  or prevention of cancer.
Selenium is available in the United States in food products and dietary supplements. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of selenium supplements may not be the same. Selenium is a mineral that is essential to people in tiny amounts. Selenium is needed for many body functions, including reproduction and immunity. Food sources of selenium include meat, vegetables, and nuts. The amount of selenium found in the food depends on the  amount of selenium in the soil where the food grows. Selenium is stored  in the thyroid gland, liver, pancreas, pituitary gland, and kidneys. Selenium may play a role in many diseases, including cancer. Results of the large National Cancer Institute-sponsored Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT) suggest that men with prostate cancer should not take selenium supplements. Selenium may be eaten in food or taken in dietary  supplements. For information on laboratory and animal studies done using selenium, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Population studies and clinical trials have been done to find out if selenium can prevent or treat prostate cancer. The results of these studies have been mixed, but the results of a large, randomized clinical trial showed selenium had no effect on preventing prostate cancer. A review of 15 studies found that blood selenium levels and levels of selenium measured in toenail clippings were linked to a decreased risk of prostate cancer. Population studies One study tracking men for up to 10 years found that those who had high levels of selenium in  their blood had a  lower risk of prostate cancer. However, a 2009 study found that  men with high selenium levels were at greater risk of being diagnosed with aggressive prostate cancer. These differences may be due to genetic factors. The Health Professionals Follow-Up Study included 4,459 men with prostate cancer that had not spread to other parts of the body. The study found that taking selenium supplements after diagnosis may increase the risk of death from prostate cancer. The study investigators recommended that men with prostate cancer use caution in taking selenium supplements. The Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT) SELECT was a large clinical trial begun by the National Cancer Institute in 2001 to find out whether selenium and/or vitamin E could help prevent prostate cancer when taken as dietary supplements. Over 35,000 men, aged 50 years and older, were randomly assigned  to receive one of the following combinations daily for 7 to 12 years: Vitamin E and a placebo. Selenium and a placebo. Vitamin E and selenium. Two placebos. Early results of SELECT reported in 2009 found no difference in the rate of prostate cancer among the 4 groups. In the selenium alone group, there was a slight increase in the rate of diabetes mellitus. Even though this change was not clearly shown to be due to the supplement, the men in the study were advised to stop taking the study supplements. Updated results of SELECT in 2011 showed that  selenium supplements had no effect on prostate cancer  risk. In 2014, further results of SELECT showed that selenium supplements in men with low selenium levels at the start of the trial had  no effect on prostate cancer risk. However, selenium supplements in men who had high levels of selenium at the start of the trial increased the risk of aggressive prostate cancer. A study of 1,434 men in SELECT suggested that changes in certain genes which  control the way selenium is used by the body may have an effect on the risk of prostate cancer. Several factors may have affected study results, including the dose of vitamin E and the form of selenium used. The authors concluded that men should avoid selenium at doses that are higher than the recommended dietary intake. Selenium supplements have been well tolerated in many clinical trials. But, in the SELECT trial, the use of selenium supplements was linked with a slight  increase in  the rate of diabetes mellitus. In several large studies, men with high selenium levels were at greater risk of being diagnosed with aggressive prostate cancer or dying from prostate cancer. The FDA has not approved the use of selenium supplements for the treatment  or prevention of cancer. Selenium is available in the United States in food products and dietary supplements. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of selenium supplements may not be the same. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. Current Clinical Trials What is soy?
The soybean plant has been grown in Asia for food for hundreds of years. The soybean can be made into  products, such as soy milk, miso, tofu, soy flour, and oil. Soy foods contain phytochemicals that may have health benefits.   Isoflavones are the most widely    studied compounds in soy. Major isoflavones in the soybean include  genistein, daidzein, and glycitein.    Isoflavones are phytoestrogens     (estrogen-like substances found in plants) that attach to estrogen receptors found in prostate cancer cells. Genistein may affect some processes inside prostate cancer cells that are involved in the growth and spread of cancer. How is soy  given or taken?

     
    Soy may be eaten in food or taken in dietary supplements. Have any laboratory or animal studies
         been done using soy?
 For information on laboratory and animal studies done using soy, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Have any  studies of soy  been done in people?
Population studies and clinical trials have been done to find out if soy  can prevent or treat prostate cancer. The results of these studies have been mixed. Some studies have shown a lower risk of prostate cancer or a change in prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level, and others have not. The results may be mixed because of the small number of men who participated in the studies and the different types and doses of soy products given.Combined population studies A 2018 review showed that men eating large amounts of nonfermented soy foods (for example, tofu and soybean milk) had a lower risk of prostate cancer. Eating large amounts of fermented foods (for example, miso) was not found to affect the risk of prostate cancer. However, these results may have been affected by the way the data were collected, the types of soy taken, and genetic risk factors.Clinical trialsSmall randomized clinical trials have been done to study the effects of isoflavones or soy on prostate cancer. The results of these studies have been mixed. See Table 3,  Table 4, and Table 5  of the health professional version of this summary for information on randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials of isoflavones and soy. Have any side effects or risks been reported from soy?Soy  products and isoflavones have been taken by prostate cancer patients with very few side effects in many clinical trials.  The most commonly reported side effects were gastrointestinal symptoms, such as diarrhea. Is soy  approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
         for use to prevent or treat cancer in the United States?The FDA has not approved the use of soy as a treatment for cancer or any other medical condition.
Soy is available in the United States in food products and dietary supplements. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of soy supplements may not be the same. The soybean plant has been grown in Asia for food for hundreds of years. The soybean can be made into  products, such as soy milk, miso, tofu, soy flour, and oil. Soy foods contain phytochemicals that may have health benefits.   Isoflavones are the most widely    studied compounds in soy. Major isoflavones in the soybean include  genistein, daidzein, and glycitein. Isoflavones are phytoestrogens     (estrogen-like substances found in plants) that attach to estrogen receptors found in prostate cancer cells. Genistein may affect some processes inside prostate cancer cells that are involved in the growth and spread of cancer. Soy may be eaten in food or taken in dietary supplements. For information on laboratory and animal studies done using soy, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Population studies and clinical trials have been done to find out if soy  can prevent or treat prostate cancer. The results of these studies have been mixed. Some studies have shown a lower risk of prostate cancer or a change in prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level, and others have not. The results may be mixed because of the small number of men who participated in the studies and the different types and doses of soy products given. Combined population studies A 2018 review showed that men eating large amounts of nonfermented soy foods (for example, tofu and soybean milk) had a lower risk of prostate cancer. Eating large amounts of fermented foods (for example, miso) was not found to affect the risk of prostate cancer. However, these results may have been affected by the way the data were collected, the types of soy taken, and genetic risk factors. Clinical trials Small randomized clinical trials have been done to study the effects of isoflavones or soy on prostate cancer. The results of these studies have been mixed. See Table 3,  Table 4, and Table 5  of the health professional version of this summary for information on randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials of isoflavones and soy. Soy  products and isoflavones have been taken by prostate cancer patients with very few side effects in many clinical trials.  The most commonly reported side effects were gastrointestinal symptoms, such as diarrhea. The FDA has not approved the use of soy as a treatment for cancer or any other medical condition. Soy is available in the United States in food products and dietary supplements. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of soy supplements may not be the same. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. Current Clinical Trials What is vitamin D?
Vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin found in  fatty fish, fish liver oil, and eggs. Vitamin D may also be added to dairy products. Vitamin D has many functions in the body, such as the following:Helps absorb calcium from food in the small intestine.Improves muscle strength and immune system function.Lowers  inflammation.Maintains levels of calcium and phosphate in the blood.Helps with bone growth and protects against osteoporosis in adults.A person’s vitamin D level is checked by measuring the amount of 25-hydroxyvitamin D in the blood. How is vitamin D given or taken?Vitamin D is made by the body when exposed to sunlight.
     
    Vitamin D may also be eaten in food or taken in dietary  supplements. Have any laboratory or animal studies
         been done using vitamin D? For information on laboratory and animal studies done using vitamin D, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Have any  studies of vitamin D been done in people?Population studies and clinical trials have been done to study the effects of vitamin D on prostate cancer. The results of these studies have been mixed. Some studies have shown a link between Vitamin D levels and prostate cancer, and others have not. There is not enough evidence to know whether vitamin D can prevent prostate cancer.Combined studiesA 2008 review of 45 studies  found no link between taking vitamin D and prostate cancer risk.A 2009 study found that men with low levels of sun exposure had an increased risk of  prostate cancer and advanced disease.A 2011 review of 25 studies  found no link between either vitamin D in the diet or blood levels of vitamin D and the risk of prostate cancer.A 2014 review of 21 studies  found that high levels of vitamin D  may be linked with a higher risk of prostate cancer. Many factors  may have affected this finding. It has been proposed that men from higher income groups may have higher vitamin D levels and   are more likely to get PSA testing, leading to higher  rates of reported prostate cancer.
Population studiesVitamin D levels were checked every year for 5 years in  men with prostate cancer that had  not spread. Throughout the study,   low levels of  vitamin D      were found in these men. Another study in  men with prostate cancer suggested that medium or high levels of vitamin D  in the blood may be linked  with better outcomes than lower levels.One thousand men with prostate cancer and  1,000 men who did not have prostate cancer were followed for up to 20 years in the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study.  Results suggested that men with higher blood levels of vitamin D  had a greater risk of prostate cancer than men with lower vitamin D levels.In an analysis from the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT), men who had moderate blood levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D were found to have a lower risk of aggressive prostate cancer than men who had either lower or  higher levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D.A study of patterns  of deaths in the United States from 1950 to 1994 showed that higher death rates from prostate cancer occurred in parts of the country with lower  levels of UV radiation from sunlight.  Clinical trialsIn a 2018 randomized controlled trial, vitamin D3 and omega-3 fatty acid supplements were given to prevent  cancer and cardiovascular disease. Those who took the vitamin D supplement did not have a lower rate of any cancer.A clinical trial treated patients with prostate cancer that had recurred (come back) with calcitriol (the active form of vitamin D) and naproxen for 1 year. Results showed that  after taking calcitriol and naproxen the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level rose more slowly. In a 2010 study, patients with prostate cancer that did not respond to  hormone therapy were treated with calcitriol and dexamethasone. The results showed no effect on PSA levels.In a 2009 study, patients  with locally advanced or metastatic prostate cancer were treated with vitamin D. The study reported that 1 in every 5  patients who took vitamin D had lower PSA levels. Have any side effects or risks been reported from vitamin D? Vitamin D can cause serious health problems when taken at high doses over many years. Taking high levels of Vitamin D can cause too much calcium to be absorbed in the intestines, leading to rapid increases in blood calcium levels. This condition is called hypercalcemia.In a  group of 26 studies,  Vitamin D was reviewed for safety, how well it works,  and   whether it interacts with drugs used to treat prostate cancer and other tumors.  The reviewers found the risk of side effects and interactions with other drugs to be low. Several studies looked at the safety of high-dose vitamin D and how well it  works with chemotherapy (docetaxel) to treat men with prostate cancer that did not respond to hormone therapy. The side effects that occurred after treatment with high-dose vitamin D and docetaxel were the same as the side effects noted after treatment with docetaxel alone. Is vitamin D approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
         for use as a cancer treatment in the United States?
The FDA has not approved the use of vitamin D as a treatment for cancer.Vitamin D is available in the United States in food products and dietary supplements. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of vitamin D supplements may not be the same. Vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin found in  fatty fish, fish liver oil, and eggs. Vitamin D may also be added to dairy products. Vitamin D has many functions in the body, such as the following: Helps absorb calcium from food in the small intestine. Improves muscle strength and immune system function. Lowers  inflammation. Maintains levels of calcium and phosphate in the blood. Helps with bone growth and protects against osteoporosis in adults. A person’s vitamin D level is checked by measuring the amount of 25-hydroxyvitamin D in the blood. Vitamin D is made by the body when exposed to sunlight.
     
    Vitamin D may also be eaten in food or taken in dietary  supplements. For information on laboratory and animal studies done using vitamin D, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Population studies and clinical trials have been done to study the effects of vitamin D on prostate cancer. The results of these studies have been mixed. Some studies have shown a link between Vitamin D levels and prostate cancer, and others have not. There is not enough evidence to know whether vitamin D can prevent prostate cancer. Combined studies A 2008 review of 45 studies  found no link between taking vitamin D and prostate cancer risk. A 2009 study found that men with low levels of sun exposure had an increased risk of  prostate cancer and advanced disease. A 2011 review of 25 studies  found no link between either vitamin D in the diet or blood levels of vitamin D and the risk of prostate cancer. A 2014 review of 21 studies  found that high levels of vitamin D  may be linked with a higher risk of prostate cancer. Many factors  may have affected this finding. It has been proposed that men from higher income groups may have higher vitamin D levels and   are more likely to get PSA testing, leading to higher  rates of reported prostate cancer. Population studies Vitamin D levels were checked every year for 5 years in  men with prostate cancer that had  not spread. Throughout the study,   low levels of  vitamin D      were found in these men. Another study in  men with prostate cancer suggested that medium or high levels of vitamin D  in the blood may be linked  with better outcomes than lower levels. One thousand men with prostate cancer and  1,000 men who did not have prostate cancer were followed for up to 20 years in the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study.  Results suggested that men with higher blood levels of vitamin D  had a greater risk of prostate cancer than men with lower vitamin D levels. In an analysis from the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT), men who had moderate blood levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D were found to have a lower risk of aggressive prostate cancer than men who had either lower or  higher levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D. A study of patterns  of deaths in the United States from 1950 to 1994 showed that higher death rates from prostate cancer occurred in parts of the country with lower  levels of UV radiation from sunlight. Clinical trials In a 2018 randomized controlled trial, vitamin D3 and omega-3 fatty acid supplements were given to prevent  cancer and cardiovascular disease. Those who took the vitamin D supplement did not have a lower rate of any cancer. A clinical trial treated patients with prostate cancer that had recurred (come back) with calcitriol (the active form of vitamin D) and naproxen for 1 year. Results showed that  after taking calcitriol and naproxen the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level rose more slowly. In a 2010 study, patients with prostate cancer that did not respond to  hormone therapy were treated with calcitriol and dexamethasone. The results showed no effect on PSA levels. In a 2009 study, patients  with locally advanced or metastatic prostate cancer were treated with vitamin D. The study reported that 1 in every 5  patients who took vitamin D had lower PSA levels. Vitamin D can cause serious health problems when taken at high doses over many years. Taking high levels of Vitamin D can cause too much calcium to be absorbed in the intestines, leading to rapid increases in blood calcium levels. This condition is called hypercalcemia. In a  group of 26 studies,  Vitamin D was reviewed for safety, how well it works,  and   whether it interacts with drugs used to treat prostate cancer and other tumors.  The reviewers found the risk of side effects and interactions with other drugs to be low. Several studies looked at the safety of high-dose vitamin D and how well it  works with chemotherapy (docetaxel) to treat men with prostate cancer that did not respond to hormone therapy. The side effects that occurred after treatment with high-dose vitamin D and docetaxel were the same as the side effects noted after treatment with docetaxel alone. The FDA has not approved the use of vitamin D as a treatment for cancer. Vitamin D is available in the United States in food products and dietary supplements. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of vitamin D supplements may not be the same. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. Current Clinical Trials What is vitamin E?
Vitamin E is an antioxidant that may help protect cells from damage. Vitamin E also affects how signals are sent within cells and how the cell makes RNA and proteins.     There are eight forms of  vitamin E: four tocopherols (alpha-, beta-, gamma-, and sigma-) and four tocotrienols (alpha-, beta-, gamma-, and sigma-). Alpha-tocopherol, the form of vitamin E used in dietary supplements, is found in greater amounts in the body and is the  most active form of vitamin E. Most vitamin E in the diet comes from gamma-tocopherol. Food sources of vitamin E include   vegetable oils, nuts, and egg yolks.
 Vitamin E may protect against chronic diseases, such as heart and blood vessel disease. How is vitamin E  given or taken?

     
    Vitamin E may be eaten in food or taken in dietary  supplements. Have any  studies of vitamin E been done in people?Population studies and clinical trials have been done to find out if vitamin E  may prevent prostate cancer. The results of these studies have been mixed; some studies have shown no change in the overall risk of prostate cancer, and others have shown an increased risk of prostate cancer. There is not enough evidence to know whether vitamin E affects the risk of prostate cancer.Combined population studiesIn a review of  combined studies with about 370,000 men from several countries,  higher blood levels of alpha-tocopherol were linked with  a lower risk of prostate cancer.
Population studiesThe National Institutes of Health–American Association of Retired Persons (NIH-AARP) Diet and Healthy Study studied  whether taking increased amounts of vitamin E in the diet and in dietary supplements could prevent prostate cancer. After 5 years, no link between vitamin E supplements and prostate cancer risk was found. However, a lower risk of advanced prostate cancer was found in men who took high amounts of gamma-tocopherol. In a 2010 study that measured  blood levels of vitamin E, the men who had prostate cancer had lower blood levels of vitamin E than those who did not have prostate cancer. In addition, those who had higher PSA levels had lower levels of vitamin E in their blood.The Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta Carotene Cancer Prevention Study (ATBC) trial measured blood levels of alpha-tocopherol and dietary intake of vitamin E in men who were followed for up to 19 years. Results showed no link between vitamin E in the diet and prostate cancer risk. However, higher levels of alpha-tocopherol in the blood may be linked with a lower risk of advanced prostate cancer. Men in the ATBC trial who developed prostate cancer were studied to find out if  blood levels of alpha-tocopherol affected survival time. Higher blood levels of alpha-tocopherol, at both time  of diagnosis and at the 3-year time point, were linked with improved prostate cancer survival.
The Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT) SELECT was a large clinical trial begun by the National Cancer Institute in 2001 to find out whether selenium and/or vitamin E could help prevent  prostate cancer when taken as dietary supplements. Over 35,000 men, aged 50 years and older, were randomly assigned  to receive one of the following combinations daily for 7 to12 years:Vitamin E and a placebo.Selenium and a placebo.Vitamin E and selenium.Two placebos.SELECT results published in 2011 showed that men taking vitamin E alone had a 17% increase in prostate cancer risk compared with men who did not take vitamin E. Several factors may have affected study results, including the dose of vitamin E.Clinical trialsIn the Physicians’ Health Study II, men took either vitamin E supplements, vitamin C supplements, or both and were followed for about 8 years. The overall rates of prostate cancer were similar in the men who took vitamin E supplements and in those who did not. Vitamin E did not affect the number of new cases of cancer or the number of deaths from cancer.A 2011 study of men who took part in The Carotene and Retinol Efficacy Trial (CARET) found that, among those who were current smokers, higher blood levels of alpha-tocopherols and gamma-tocopherols were linked with lower risk of aggressive prostate cancer. In another study of men who were current smokers or who recently stopped smoking, higher blood levels of alpha-tocopherol were linked to a lower risk of prostate cancer. Have any side effects or risks been reported from vitamin E?In the Physicians’ Health Study II and the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta Carotene Cancer Prevention Study Group, there was a higher number of strokes caused by a broken blood vessel in the brain in men who took vitamin E than in men who took a placebo. Is vitamin E  approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
         for use as a cancer treatment in the United States?
The FDA has not approved the use of vitamin E  as a treatment for cancer.Alpha-tocopherols are deemed Generally Recognized as Safe by the FDA.Vitamin E is available in the United States in food products and dietary supplements. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of vitamin E supplements may not be the same. Vitamin E is an antioxidant that may help protect cells from damage. Vitamin E also affects how signals are sent within cells and how the cell makes RNA and proteins. There are eight forms of  vitamin E: four tocopherols (alpha-, beta-, gamma-, and sigma-) and four tocotrienols (alpha-, beta-, gamma-, and sigma-). Alpha-tocopherol, the form of vitamin E used in dietary supplements, is found in greater amounts in the body and is the  most active form of vitamin E. Most vitamin E in the diet comes from gamma-tocopherol. Food sources of vitamin E include   vegetable oils, nuts, and egg yolks. Vitamin E may protect against chronic diseases, such as heart and blood vessel disease. Vitamin E may be eaten in food or taken in dietary  supplements. Population studies and clinical trials have been done to find out if vitamin E  may prevent prostate cancer. The results of these studies have been mixed; some studies have shown no change in the overall risk of prostate cancer, and others have shown an increased risk of prostate cancer. There is not enough evidence to know whether vitamin E affects the risk of prostate cancer. Combined population studies In a review of  combined studies with about 370,000 men from several countries,  higher blood levels of alpha-tocopherol were linked with  a lower risk of prostate cancer. Population studies The National Institutes of Health–American Association of Retired Persons (NIH-AARP) Diet and Healthy Study studied  whether taking increased amounts of vitamin E in the diet and in dietary supplements could prevent prostate cancer. After 5 years, no link between vitamin E supplements and prostate cancer risk was found. However, a lower risk of advanced prostate cancer was found in men who took high amounts of gamma-tocopherol. In a 2010 study that measured  blood levels of vitamin E, the men who had prostate cancer had lower blood levels of vitamin E than those who did not have prostate cancer. In addition, those who had higher PSA levels had lower levels of vitamin E in their blood. The Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta Carotene Cancer Prevention Study (ATBC) trial measured blood levels of alpha-tocopherol and dietary intake of vitamin E in men who were followed for up to 19 years. Results showed no link between vitamin E in the diet and prostate cancer risk. However, higher levels of alpha-tocopherol in the blood may be linked with a lower risk of advanced prostate cancer. Men in the ATBC trial who developed prostate cancer were studied to find out if  blood levels of alpha-tocopherol affected survival time. Higher blood levels of alpha-tocopherol, at both time  of diagnosis and at the 3-year time point, were linked with improved prostate cancer survival. Men in the ATBC trial who developed prostate cancer were studied to find out if  blood levels of alpha-tocopherol affected survival time. Higher blood levels of alpha-tocopherol, at both time  of diagnosis and at the 3-year time point, were linked with improved prostate cancer survival. The Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT) SELECT was a large clinical trial begun by the National Cancer Institute in 2001 to find out whether selenium and/or vitamin E could help prevent  prostate cancer when taken as dietary supplements. Over 35,000 men, aged 50 years and older, were randomly assigned  to receive one of the following combinations daily for 7 to12 years: Vitamin E and a placebo. Selenium and a placebo. Vitamin E and selenium. Two placebos. SELECT results published in 2011 showed that men taking vitamin E alone had a 17% increase in prostate cancer risk compared with men who did not take vitamin E. Several factors may have affected study results, including the dose of vitamin E. Clinical trials In the Physicians’ Health Study II, men took either vitamin E supplements, vitamin C supplements, or both and were followed for about 8 years. The overall rates of prostate cancer were similar in the men who took vitamin E supplements and in those who did not. Vitamin E did not affect the number of new cases of cancer or the number of deaths from cancer. A 2011 study of men who took part in The Carotene and Retinol Efficacy Trial (CARET) found that, among those who were current smokers, higher blood levels of alpha-tocopherols and gamma-tocopherols were linked with lower risk of aggressive prostate cancer. In another study of men who were current smokers or who recently stopped smoking, higher blood levels of alpha-tocopherol were linked to a lower risk of prostate cancer. In the Physicians’ Health Study II and the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta Carotene Cancer Prevention Study Group, there was a higher number of strokes caused by a broken blood vessel in the brain in men who took vitamin E than in men who took a placebo. The FDA has not approved the use of vitamin E  as a treatment for cancer. Alpha-tocopherols are deemed Generally Recognized as Safe by the FDA. Vitamin E is available in the United States in food products and dietary supplements. The FDA does not approve dietary supplements as safe or effective. The company that makes the dietary supplements is responsible for making sure that they are safe and that the claims on the label are true and do not mislead the consumer. The way that supplements are made is not regulated by the FDA, so all batches and brands of vitamin E supplements may not be the same. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. Pomi-T (Pomegranate, Green Tea, Broccoli, and Turmeric) Lycopene, Selenium, and Green Tea Lycopene and Other Therapies Zyflamend Polyphenols are found in many plants and give some flowers, fruits, and vegetables their color. Polyphenols have antioxidant activity that may help protect cells from damage. A food supplement that is high in polyphenols was studied in a group of men who had prostate cancer that had not spread. This supplement contained the following: Pomegranate whole fruit powder. Green tea extract. Broccoli powder. Turmeric powder. One hundred and ninety-nine men were randomly assigned to receive either the food supplement or a placebo for 6 months. The food supplement was well tolerated. However, men  in the supplement group were more likely to have gastrointestinal symptoms, such as increased gas and loose bowels. A dietary supplement was studied in 60 men at high risk of prostate cancer (high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia). The supplement contained the following: Lycopene. Selenium. Green tea catechins. The men were randomly assigned to receive the supplement or a placebo. Men who took the supplement for 6 months had higher rates of prostate cancer when they had a repeat biopsy than men who did not take the supplement. This result may be due to cancers missed at the start of the study. A  study enrolled 79 men who were scheduled to have a prostatectomy. For 3 weeks before surgery, the men were assigned to eat or drink either: Tomato products containing lycopene. Tomato products plus selenium, omega 3-fatty acids, soy isoflavones, grape/pomegranate juice, and green/black tea. A diet without added nutrients. The prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels were the same for men who received added nutrients and those who did not. However, among men with intermediate-risk prostate cancer, lower PSA levels were found in those who ate the tomato products or had the highest increases in lycopene levels. Zyflamend is a dietary supplement that contains extracts of 10 different herbs  in olive oil: Rosemary. Turmeric. Ginger. Holy basil. Green tea. Hu zhang (Polygonum cuspidatum). Chinese goldthread. Barberry. Oregano. Baikal skullcap. The herb extracts used in Zyflamend may have anti-inflammatory activity. There is not enough evidence to know whether Zyflamend can prevent or treat prostate cancer. Zyflamend is taken as a dietary supplement in capsule form. No serious side effects have been reported for Zyflamend. In one study, some men had mild heartburn that went away when Zyflamend was taken with food. Overview African Cherry (pygeum africanum) and beta-sitosterol  are two  supplements that have been studied for general prostate health and the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and prostate cancer.  For more information about African Cherry (pygeum africanum) and beta-sitosterol, see the health professional version of Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish. PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the use of nutrition and dietary supplements for reducing the risk of developing prostate cancer or for treating prostate cancer.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Integrative, Alternative, and Complementary Therapies Editorial Board. A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Integrative, Alternative, and Complementary Therapies Editorial Board. PDQ Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/cam/patient/prostate-supplements-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389501] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online. Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us. Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM)—also called integrative medicine—includes a broad range of healing philosophies, approaches, and therapies. A therapy is generally called complementary when it is used in addition to conventional treatments; it is often called alternative when it is used instead of conventional treatment. (Conventional treatments are those that are widely accepted and practiced by the mainstream medical community.) Depending on how they are used, some therapies can be considered either complementary or alternative. Complementary and alternative therapies are used in an effort to prevent illness, reduce stress, prevent or reduce side effects and symptoms, or control or cure disease. Unlike conventional treatments for cancer, complementary and alternative therapies are often not covered by insurance companies. Patients should check with their insurance provider to find out about coverage for complementary and alternative therapies. Cancer patients considering complementary and alternative therapies should discuss this decision with their doctor, nurse, or pharmacist as they would any type of treatment. Some complementary and alternative therapies may affect their standard treatment or may be harmful when used with conventional treatment. It is important that the same scientific methods used to test conventional therapies are used to test CAM therapies. The National Cancer Institute  and the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) are sponsoring a number of clinical trials (research studies) at medical centers to test CAM therapies for use in cancer. Conventional approaches to cancer treatment have generally been studied for safety and effectiveness through a scientific process that includes clinical trials with large numbers of patients. Less is known about the safety and effectiveness of complementary and alternative methods. Few CAM therapies have been tested using demanding scientific methods. A small number of CAM therapies that were thought to be purely alternative approaches are now being used in cancer treatment—not as cures, but as complementary therapies that may help patients feel better and recover faster. One example is acupuncture. According to a panel of experts at a National Institutes of Health (NIH) meeting  in November 1997, acupuncture has been found to help control nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy and pain related to surgery. However, some approaches, such as the use of laetrile, have been studied and found not to work and to possibly cause harm. The NCI Best Case Series Program   which was started  in 1991, is one way CAM approaches that are being used in practice are being studied. The program is overseen by the NCI’s Office of Cancer Complementary and Alternative Medicine (OCCAM). Health care professionals who offer alternative cancer therapies submit their patients’ medical records and related materials to OCCAM. OCCAM carefully reviews these materials to see if any seem worth further research. When considering complementary and alternative therapies, patients should ask their health care provider the following questions: What side effects can be expected? What are the risks related to this therapy? What benefits can be expected from this therapy? Do the known benefits outweigh the risks? Will the therapy affect conventional treatment? Is this therapy part of a clinical trial? If so, who is the sponsor of the trial? Will the therapy be covered by health insurance? National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) The National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) facilitates research and evaluation of complementary and alternative practices, and provides information about a variety of approaches to health professionals and the public. NCCIH Clearinghouse Post Office Box 7923 Gaithersburg, MD 20898–7923 Telephone: 1-888-644-6226 (toll free) TTY (for deaf and hard of hearing callers): 1-866-464-3615 E-mail: info@nccih.nih.gov Website:  https://nccih.nih.gov CAM on PubMed NCCIH and the NIH National Library of Medicine (NLM) jointly developed CAM on PubMed, a free and easy-to-use search tool for finding CAM-related journal citations. As a subset of the NLM's PubMed bibliographic database, CAM on PubMed features more than 230,000 references and abstracts for CAM-related articles from scientific journals. This database also provides links to the websites of over 1,800 journals, allowing users to view full-text articles. (A subscription or other fee may be required to access full-text articles.) Office of Cancer Complementary and Alternative Medicine The NCI Office of Cancer Complementary and Alternative Medicine (OCCAM) coordinates the activities of the NCI in the area of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM). OCCAM supports CAM cancer research and provides information about cancer-related CAM to health providers and the general public via the NCI website. National Cancer Institute (NCI) Cancer Information Service U.S. residents may call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, toll free at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237) Monday through Friday from 9:00 am to 9:00 pm. A trained Cancer Information Specialist is available to answer your questions. Food and Drug Administration The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulates drugs and medical devices to ensure that they are safe and effective. Food and Drug Administration 10903 New Hampshire Avenue Silver Spring, MD 20993 Telephone: 1-888-463-6332 (toll free) Website: http://www.fda.gov Federal Trade Commission The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) enforces consumer protection laws. Publications available from the FTC include: Who Cares: Sources of Information About Health Care Products and Services Fraudulent Health Claims: Don’t Be Fooled Consumer Response Center Federal Trade Commission 600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington, DC 20580 Telephone: 1-877-FTC-HELP (1-877-382-4357) (toll free) TTY (for deaf and  hard of hearing callers): 202-326-2502 Website: http://www.ftc.gov
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NCI at AACR 2021: Meet the Experts - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/events/conferences/aacr-2021/meet-the-experts
txt: To keep the momentum of the meeting going, NCI will host 16 sessions between the two parts of the AACR Annual Meeting. Join NCI experts live to discuss NCI programs, resources, and opportunities for cancer researchers. Sessions are free and open to the public, but registration is required. Sign up for sessions of your choice by clicking the respective links below. Once registered for a session, you will receive an email with a calendar invite attached. Sign language interpreting services are available upon request. Individuals who need interpreting services and/or other reasonable accommodations to participate in these events should contact the NIH Interpreting Office directly via email at nih@ainterpreting.com at least 5 days prior to the event. Receive the latest updates by subscribing to NCI’s AACR Conference GovDelivery emails. All sessions will take place at 1:00–1:30 p.m. ET. Monday, April 19 Samson Y. Gebreab
			Mulualem Tilahun
			Hana Odeh Monday, April 26 Shizuko Sei April Oh
			Gila Neta
			Sarah Bernal Monday, May 3 Sudhir Srivastava Monday, May 10 Tracy Lively
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Stroma Breaking Theranostic Nanoparticles for Targeted Pancreatic Cancer Therapy - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/nano/research/alliance/ircn/emory
txt: Principal Investigators: Lily Yang, M.D., Ph.D., and Hui Mao, Ph.D. Co-Investigators: Charles Staley, M.D., David Kooby, M.D., Bassel El-Rayes, M.D., Malgorzata Lipowska, Ph.D., Liya Wang, M.D., and Andrew Wang, Ph.D. (Ocean Nanotech, LLD) The goal of this project is to develop a dual targeted and stroma breaking theranostic nanoparticle platform to address an unmet, clinical challenge of poor drug delivery efficiency in the application of nanomedicine to cancer therapy. Many types of human cancers, particularly pancreatic cancer, present a dense fibrotic tumor stroma that creates physical barriers against conventional drug delivery approaches. Building upon our understanding of pancreatic cancer biology and expertise in developing theranostic nanoparticles, we are developing a stroma breaking drug delivery system using a new generation of 3-nm ultra-fine magnetic iron oxide nanoparticle (uIONP) coated with an anti-fouling 'stealth' polymer for enhanced tumor penetration and retention, high capacity drug loading, and T1/T2-switchable MRI contrasts for imaging drug delivery. A dual targeting strategy coupling ligands targeting urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) and insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) onto a single nanoparticle is used to maximize both tumor stromal and pancreatic cancer cell targeting, and drug delivery. Additionally, the use of a recombinant MMP14 protease active uPAR targeting ligand should break the extracellular matrix barrier. uIONPs will carry cisplatin and / or SN38, a potent camptothecin analogue, for effective treatment of drug resistant pancreatic cancer cells. The combination of these unique properties should enable the theranostic uIONPs to break tumor stromal barriers and disrupt the tumor microenvironment leading to improved cancer molecular targeting and drug delivery in treating pancreatic cancer. The efficiency of targeted delivery and intratumoral distribution of the uIONP and therapeutic efficacy will be investigated in orthotopic human pancreatic cancer patient tissue-derived xenograft (PDX) and transgenic mouse pancreatic tumor models using MR and optical imaging, multiphoton microscopy, and histological and chemical analyses. This new generation of theranostic IONPs and our strategy to overcome drug delivery barriers will change the paradigm of future development and translation of image-guided and targeted therapies for the treatment of advanced pancreatic cancer as well as cancer nanotechnology in general. The team has expertise in targeted cancer therapy, theranostic nanoparticles, image-guided cancer treatment, and animal tumor models as well as extensive experience in the development of magnetic nanoparticles as MRI contrasts / drug carriers and MRI methodology.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: 2022 World Cancer Congress - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/cgh/events/world-cancer-congress-2022
txt: October 18
                        –
                        October 20, 2022 Hybrid
Geneva, Switzerland Add to Outlook Calendar The National Cancer Institute (NCI) is convening several pre-recorded and in-person scientific sessions at the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) 2022 World Cancer Congress (hybrid), October 18-20, 2022 in Geneva, Switzerland, and through an online digital platform. Registration for the conference is required to attend and view online sessions. (All time listed below are in CET) View the preliminary program E-Library The NCI booth (5/6) can be found in the Global Village located in the main foyer and on the first floor of the International Conference Center Geneva (CICG), the official Congress venue. NCI will host in-booth sessions during the conference. Join NCI experts live to discuss NCI programs, resources, and opportunities for researchers and cancer control partners. Sessions are free, but registration for the conference is required.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: How Adaptive Cancer Therapy Works - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/annual-plan/scientific-topics/how-adaptive-cancer-therapy-works-infographic
txt: Finding new ways, such as adaptive cancer therapy, to limit the development of drug resistance will be useful in treating many cancers.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: What’s New in 2024 - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/connect-prevention-study/news/updates-return-information
txt:  Connect for Cancer Prevention Study  Study News   Study News       Over 20,000 participants have enrolled in Connect! We're excited to begin sharing group-level information about the participant cohort to date. Currently, we're exploring data from the first Connect survey, which includes information on sleep patterns and behaviors. You may read the Did You Know article on healthy sleep to see what we’ve learned so far about Connect participants who have answered their survey, the importance of sleep for cancer prevention, and tips for getting better sleep. We look forward to sharing more group-level information throughout the future as we continue to study the responses from the first survey. Samples are like time capsules of information about your health. When we begin to study the samples you donated for Connect, we will share an updated timeline for when you may expect to see some early results. We'll collect similar samples and study them at different time points throughout the study to better understand how health changes over time. While some tests may be run earlier, it will be years before we run other tests on the samples. Saving some of the samples for tests that haven’t been developed yet may help us learn more about cancer prevention in the future. The Connect research team has several activities that participants can expect in the upcoming year. In 2024, the PROMIS Survey (which measures physical, mental, and social well-being) and the Dietary History Questionnaire (which asks about diet and food/beverage intake) will be available to you on MyConnect. We will email you when these surveys are ready. We’re also looking forward to launching at home mouthwash collection for the study. The mouthwash sample can be collected by you in the comfort of your home and mailed back to the Connect lab. We will study the samples in the future to learn more about the causes of cancer. If you already donated your first blood, urine, and mouthwash samples for Connect at an appointment, thank you! If you recently donated just blood and urine at your health care system or clinic, keep an eye out for an email from us letting you know that your mouthwash home collection kit has shipped. The kit has instructions and everything you need to collect and send back your sample. We’ll start shipping kits in the new year. Have you moved recently or need to update your address? Please help keep our research team up to date by updating your preferred address through MyConnect. Sharing your current address will allow our team to share important updates and other study communications through the mail. We also want to mail you a birthday card! On behalf of the Connect Coordinating Center, thank you for your ongoing commitment to the study. Your contributions hold great value for the future of cancer prevention. I hope you feel supported by our team, and that you continue to spread the word about Connect within your community. Mia Gaudet, Ph.D., leads the Connect for Cancer Prevention Study at NCI. As always, stay tuned for emails from us, and please visit MyConnect to check for any surveys you might need to complete under the “To Do” tab of your dashboard. If you have any feedback or questions, contact our team at the Connect Support Center. I look forward to keeping in touch throughout the new year. Wishing you a happy and healthy holiday season! Mia Gaudet, Ph.D.
Senior Scientist
Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics
National Cancer Institute
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Kevin Howcroft, Ph.D. - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/about/contact/kevin-howcroft
txt: Dr. Kevin Howcroft leads the branch in supporting studies on the basic mechanisms of anti-tumor immune responses, the molecular bases of and hematologic malignancies, and the role of microbes in cancer etiology. His areas of expertise include cancer immunology, gene regulation, multiple myeloma, extracellular vesicles, and retrotransposons. His grant portfolio  focuses on B cell cancers, specifically multiple myelomas and it's precursor conditions. In describing recent advances in immuno-oncology research, Dr. Howcroft says, “There is a growing sense that our immune response can recognize and eradicate tumors. The use of combination approaches to take away multiple resistance pathways is showing much promise for many cancer patients.” Along with his work in DCB, Dr. Howcroft is also co-chair for an NCI Cancer Moonshot Implementation Team, the NCI representative for the NIH Geroscience Interest Group (GSIG), a member of the NCI AIDS Internal Working Group, the NIH Cancer and Aging Coordinating Committee, the NCI TACTIC group, and the trans-NIH Microbiome Working Group.  Research Programs Dr. Howcroft is also involved in NCI cooperative agreement and NIH Common Fund programs, as well as a Cancer Moonshot initiative: Immuno-Oncology Translational Network (IOTN)  Pediatric Immunotherapy Network (PIN)  Cancer Immunoprevention Network (CIP-Net)  Cellular Senescence Network (SenNet)  Extracellular RNA Communication (ExRNA)  Background Prior to DCB, Dr. Howcroft was a staff scientist at NCI studying the molecular biology and regulation of MHC Class 1.  Education Ph.D, Immunology, University of Connecticut  M.S, Cell Biology, University of Cincinnati  B.S., Biology, University of Cincinnati  
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Raloxifene Hydrochloride - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/raloxifenehydrochloride
txt: This page contains brief information about raloxifene hydrochloride and a collection of links to more information about the use of this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Raloxifene hydrochloride is approved to prevent: Breast cancer. It is used to decrease the chance of invasive breast cancer in postmenopausal women who  have a high risk for developing the disease or who have osteoporosis. Raloxifene hydrochloride is also approved to  prevent and treat: Osteoporosis in postmenopausal women. Raloxifene hydrochloride is also being studied in the treatment of other types of cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Raloxifene Hydrochloride - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Hormone Therapy for Breast Cancer Find Clinical Trials for Raloxifene Hydrochloride - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Information for New Trainees and Fellows - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/grants-training/training/resources-trainees/new-to-nci
txt: Welcome to NCI - we're excited that you are here. These materials support your NCI fellowship orientation.  Trainee Orientations  Rules and Regulations  Outside Activities  Trainee Benefits  Electronic Individual Development Plan (eIDP)  Stipend and Tax Information  Links to Additional Resources  Trainee Orientations Rules and Regulations Outside Activities Trainee Benefits Electronic Individual Development Plan (eIDP) Stipend and Tax Information Links to Additional Resources Trainee Orientations To welcome trainees to the NIH, the Center for Cancer Training conducts  orientations that are held monthly on both the second Tuesday (Bethesda campus) and Wednesday (Frederick) of the month.  Currently, orientation is being held virtually via WebEx.  Registration is announced one week prior, and meeting details will be sent to all who registered.  All trainees are welcomed. Each orientation will provide trainees with information on topics such as taxes, non-FTE policies, fellow-led groups to get involved in, and professional development opportunities available to you  Rules and Regulations Most fellows who come to NIH are familiar with working in a university setting. However, working for the federal government is different in many ways.  As a trainee in the federal government, you are required to abide by ethical guidelines regarding awards, travel, and outside activities.  For example, outside employment or participation in outside activities must be approved by your Supervisor (see Ethics Outside Activity Chart for more details). For specifics, please review the current  Cancer Research Training Award (CRTA) manual and the NIH Intramural Visiting Fellow Program Policies to ensure you stay within the guidelines.  If you have any questions, please ask your Supervisor or contact your Training Director. Outside Activities Fellows who would like to participate in outside activities as part of unofficial capacity must have the approval of their Lab or Branch chief and follow federal guidance.  Consult the NCI Office of Government Ethics for guidance. As employees of the Executive Branch, NCI staff (including fellows) are not able to participate in advocacy directed towards Congress in their official capacity (Hatch Act). If a congressional staffer or member of Congress asks you to participate in a tour or invites you to the Hill, contact Holly Gibbons in NCI’s Office of Government and Congressional Relations (OGCR) before accepting. Approval is also required prior to speaking at an event where members of Congress are expected to attend.  See more details here. (NIH credentials needed) The Hatch Act is relevant to any government staff or fellows’ use of social media accounts. For that reason, it is recommended to add a disclaimer statement to your personal accounts, such as “Views are my own.” For more on social media use, please see information on the Hatch Act and Dos & Don'ts Tips (NIH credentials needed) For general CCR guidance on these and other topics: https://ccr.cancer.gov/ccr-central/communications-resources/other-clearance-processes (NIH credentials needed) Trainee Benefits Health, dental, and vision insurance (either an individual or family plan) are provided by the NCI to trainees with appointments greater than 60 days.  The current health insurance provider is AETNA Signature PPO and the current vision/dental insurance provider is MetLife.  Both plans are administered by the Foundation for the Advanced Education in Science (FAES) – located on the First Floor in Building 10 in room 1N241.  You must enroll in the provided plan (or show proof of alternative coverage) within the first 30 days of your appointment.  Since this is bundled coverage, there is no option to opt out of any one portion of the plan.  To learn more about the enrollment process and complete your form, please visit the enrollment page on the FAES website. See FAES Election Form for more details. Retirement Benefits Fellows are not considered government employees, and therefore, are not eligible for Federal retirement benefits. Excused Absences (applies to both CRTA Fellows and Visiting Fellows) Vacation/Sick Leave: Fellows are not employees and so they do not earn annual or sick leave. However, at the discretion of the mentor, a Fellow may be excused for the following: 1) Federal holidays, 2) illness, 3) personal emergencies, and 4) vacations when awards are for more than 90 days.  Fellows should receive a minimum of two weeks excused absence annually for vacations.  For Visiting Fellows, DIS must be notified and concur with extended absences of over five weeks in order to avoid violation of immigration.  Travel: Payment of travel to attend scientific meetings or to train at a remote site is at the discretion of the NCI and is subject to availability of funds.  This process generally takes several months of advance planning and requires approval by your advisor.  Maternity Leave: Fellows will be granted paid leave, full time, excused absence for the birth or adoption of a child, with flexibility being determined by the mentor.  See CRTA manual for details.  Well-being Resources: The NIH OITE offers many resources to help you proactively tend to your stress management and address barriers to your well-being. We believe that you will find strategies to thrive at NIH if you are proactive, regularly take time to tend to your well-being, and are open to new strategies as you recognize new challenges.  We encourage all NIH trainees and fellows to regularly participate in programs to learn well-being and resilience skills. Additional NIH Amenities NIH offers many amenities that are available to trainees, such as a parking permit OR metro benefits, campus shuttles, and several child and family programs that assist with child or adult care.  Visit the Division of Amenities and Transportation Services to learn more about these and other programs. See Child and Family Programs flyer for more details. Electronic Individual Development Plan (eIDP) To assist you along your career path, you are required to complete a training plan called the electronic Individual Development Plan (eIDP).  The eIDP is designed to help you to organize and summarize your research projects and related deliverables (like manuscripts and talks), set training goals and expectations based on your research and career aspirations, and track your progress throughout your fellowship.  You will receive an automated email from the eIDP system when it is time to complete your training plan.  Together with your Supervisor or Mentors, you will each fill out your designated sections using the eIDP as a communication tool to help you get the most of your fellowship. For additional information about the eIDP, please refer to the FAQs, at-a-glance overview, or the eIDP User Guide.  A Brief Guide for completing your initial eIDP will help you get started.  If you have any questions, please contact one of the eIDP coordinators at nciidp@mail.nih.gov. Stipend and Tax Information Fellows are paid monthly through the Fellowship Payment System (FPS), always on the first business day of the month. Stipends are set in accordance with the stipend categories, which can be found in Appendix 1 of the Cancer Research Training Award (CRTA) manual. Federal and state taxes are not withheld from your stipends; you are required to file quarterly estimated tax payments to the IRS and to the specific state in which you reside while you are working at NIH. The procedures for filing quarterly estimated Federal taxes can be found using Publication 505 (2018), Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax. A 1099G tax form will be distributed to you by late January/early February.  IRS Publication 17 can also provide useful introductory information about Federal Taxes.  The procedures for filing estimated state taxes can be found by visiting the Maryland, Virginia, and Washington D.C tax websites. [updated] Visiting Fellows are typically required to file and pay Federal and State taxes.  A 1042S tax form will be distributed to you by mid-March.  However, each person’s situation is unique and will be dependent on your time spent in the US, residency status, and whether or not your country has a tax treaty with the US.    Please visit the NIH Division of International Services section on United States Income Taxes to learn more about tax treaty agreements and view nonresident tax materials to assist you in your tax preparation. Links to Additional Resources NIH Advanced Trainee Handbook 2021 (for Graduate Students, Postdoctoral, Research and Clinical Fellows)  NIH Postbac Handbook 2023  NIH Visiting Fellow Program (VFP) Policy Manual  Mandatory Trainings for Fellows  Division of International Services FAQs  NCI at Frederick New Employee Portal  NIH LISTSERV Home Page  NIH Videocasts  NIH Moving Guide  NIH Transhare Program  NIH Employee Assistance Program (EAP)  NIH Child Care Services  NIH Resource & Referral Services (Legal, Financial, Identity Theft)  On-line IT Service Request  NIH I Forgot My Password (reset) (VPN required) 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: U.Sl - China Program for Biomedical Research Cooperation - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/cgh/research-training-programs/international-bilateral-programs-china
txt: In 2010, the National Institutes of Health (NIH), in collaboration with the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC), developed a joint initiative to co-fund U.S. and Chinese scientists to conduct collaborative basic and translational biomedical research.  Researchers at the National Cancer Institute (NCI), National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), and the Office of AIDS Research (OAR) have been awarded through Administrative Supplements or R01 mechanisms that support projects to conduct scientifically meritorious investigations of mutual interest to both countries. The NCI Center for Global Health has led a preliminary evaluation of the US-China Collaborative Biomedical Research Program in 2015. The report analyzes the projects funded under the program, determines whether scientific accomplishments of the projects were results of international collaboration, and identifies common successes and challenges across projects to inform future collaborative programs. Overall, the program has funded 108 awards that generated 53 publications and 1 patent. Additional outcomes and impacts can be found in the U.S.-China Program for Biomedical Research Cooperation - Preliminary Program Review.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NIH’s Support of Early Career Scientists in Global Cancer Research: Current State and New Opportuni - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/cgh/events/international-cancer-education-conference-workshop
txt: October 12, 2022
                                            |
                        10:00 AM
                        –
                        11:30 AM University of Maryland
College Park, MD Add to Outlook Calendar October 12 | 10:00am to 11:30am EST
On Wednesday, October 12, join panelists Dr. Sudha Sivaram, NCI Center for Global Health, and Dr. Sergey Radaev, NCI Center for Cancer Training, for a workshop on NIH’s Support of Early Career Scientists in Global Cancer Research:  Current State and New Opportunities, at the 2022 International Cancer Education Conference (ICEC).  Other speakers include Drs. Dianna Ng, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, PhuongThao Le, New York University School of Global Public Health, and Clement Adebamowo, University of Maryland School of Medicine. The ICEC NIH workshop is free and open to all registrants. For details, and to register for the workshop visit the conference website.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: BIQSFP Evaluator Resources - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/ccct/funding/biqsfp/evaluator-resources
txt: BIQSFP evaluator responsibilities consist of evaluating the proposed study and completing the evaluation template with written comments by filling out the fields that follow each review criterion. Evaluation Templates are available below. Please complete a separate Evaluation Template for each study. Biomarker Study Evaluation Template (PDF)  Imaging Study Evaluation Template (PDF)  Symptom Science/QOL Evaluation Template (PDF)  Statistical Evaluation Template (PDF) 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Dr. Douglas Lauffenburger Investigates Cancer Biology from an Engineering Perspective - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/research-programs/csbc/doug-lauffenburger
txt: Doug Lauffenburger, Ph.D., a CSBC Investigator at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), has been integrating engineering and computation with biology throughout his long career. When describing his research journey, he said, “Systems biology was established and coined around 2000, but I didn’t see it as anything different from what I had already been doing for 20 years.” As an undergraduate, he trained in chemical engineering and learned how to analyze systems using mathematics. However, he chose to apply his engineering mindset to biology in graduate school. When he started his academic career, he remained interested in understanding cell biology from an engineering perspective. In this interview, he discusses his views and research related to cancer systems biology. Like most of biology, cancer is complicated. My lab characterizes it as multivariate, meaning there are multiple things all working together to yield an outcome. To understand the multiple interactions of the many different components in a multivariate cancer system, we have to bring in engineering. Systems biology is grounded in the engineering mindset of predictively understanding multivariate systems. Engineering allows us to predictively understand the effects of altering the individual properties of cancer. In other words, we can study how a change in one property affects other components and interactions within the system. Mentoring has been the most rewarding part of my career. The most gratifying thing of an academic career is the chance to interact with students and post-docs. I love that I can have a positive influence on their careers and lives. Many of my former trainees are building their own careers in cancer systems biology. Some of them are currently involved in the CSBC in different ways. Aaron Meyer, Kevin Janes, and Melissa Kemp, are a few of my former trainees who are currently investigators with different CSBC research projects. It was a privilege to have these scientists in my lab and I couldn’t be prouder of what they are doing in own careers. I wouldn’t focus on or particularly emphasize tools, which often come and go. Some old tools get forgotten because of the hype of new tools, even though they may be just as effective. There’s no particular tool that works best for every study. The most important aspect of systems biology is the field’s way of thinking. Investigating cause and effect in cancer requires multivariate analyses by computational models that are built on experimental measurements. The tools you use for making measurements or developing computational algorithms aren’t the main point. The important part is the way that you think about the problem. A crucial challenge in cancer is resistance to any therapeutic. It’s hard to envision any single cancer treatment that would work for all patients and carry no risk of relapse. There’s always a fraction of the patient population that doesn’t initially respond to a cancer treatment. Additionally, a patient often only partially responds to a therapy due to the heterogeneity and adaptation of cancer cells. There isn’t a single, stand-alone cancer treatment that can eradicate an entire tumor. We’re always going to need combinations of cancer treatments. To understand the best combinations of therapies, either all at one time or in sequence, is a challenge that requires systems biology. Multivariate analysis through cancer systems biology is the only way to understand therapeutic resistance, and will help us determine ways to overcome it. The current MIT CSBC center focuses on single-cell functional characterization of responses to cancer therapeutics. We are studying relationships between molecular measurements of cancer cells and drug responses to understand treatment resistance. Alex Shalek and Scott Manalis are working on the technical platform side of this project. They are addressing the question, “What is a good single cell phenotypic response assay that can be directly related to single-cell molecular measurements?” Collaborators at Dana-Farber are helping us collect clinical samples from cancer patients undergoing drug treatments. We also work with Chris Love to examine single tumor cell responses to treatments within the context of the microenvironment. This research will help us determine mechanisms of therapeutic resistance in cancer and approaches to combat this challenging clinical problem.
 
Links MIT Biological Engineering Profile of Doug Lauffenburger  Lauffenburger Lab Website 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Patient Advocate Steering Committee Roster - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/ccct/steering-committees/patient-advocate/roster
txt: The Patient Advocate Steering Committee (PASC) works to ensure that advocates who are members of the scientific steering committees (SSCs) and their task forces (TFs) are effectively and consistently integrated with the development and evaluation of clinical trials within those groups. PASC membership comprises patient advocate members of the SSCs and TFs.  Josh Mailman, M.B.A.
Cancer Care Delivery Research Steering Committee 
Oakland, CA Patricia Spears, B.S.
Investigational Drug Steering Committee
Raleigh, NC  Jack Aiello, M.S. 
Symptom Management and Health-Related Quality of Life Steering Committee
San Jose, CA Gregory J. Aune, M.D., Ph.D.
Pediatric Leukemia and Lymphoma Steering Committee
San Antonio, TX Upal Basu Roy, Ph.D., M.P.H.
Thoracic Malignancy Steering Committee
Bethesda, MD Dena Battle
Genitourinary Cancers Steering Committee
Alexandria, VA Lisa Beckendorf
Leukemia Steering Committee
Minneapolis, MN Jameisha Brown, M.S.
Pediatric Leukemia and Lymphoma Steering Committee
Atlanta, GA Graham Burnette
Head and Neck Steering Committee
Atherton, CA Cynthia Chmielewski, B.A.
Myeloma Steering Committee
Lawrenceville, NJ David Cranmer
Leukemia Steering Committee
Ocala, FL Anthony Crispino
Genitourinary Cancers Steering Committee
Las Vegas, NV Anjelica Q. Davis
Gastrointestinal Steering Committee
Springfield, MO Katherine Donahue, M.S., RN, CPNP, CPHON
Pediatric and Adolescent Solid Tumor Steering Committee
Washington, DC Megan Gutierrez, B.A.
Lymphoma Steering Committee
New York, NY Amanda Haddock
Brain Malignancies Steering Committee
Kechi, KS Leila Hamroun
Cancer Prevention Steering Committee
Newark, DE Lisa R. Hayes, J.D.
Breast Cancer Steering Committee
Indianapolis, IN Tricia Hernandez, M.S.
Lymphoma Steering Committee
New York, NY Judith M. Johnson, M.B.A.
Thoracic Malignancy Steering Committee
St. Louis, MO Danielle Leach, M.P.A.
Pediatric and Adolescent Solid Tumor Steering Committee
Washington, DC Susan Lim, M.S., RN
Head and Neck Steering Committee
Kirkland, WA Mary P. Lovely, Ph.D., RN, CNRN
Brain Malignancies Steering Committee
San Francisco, CA Kathleen Maxian, B.S.W
Gynecologic Cancer Steering Committee
Lockport, NY Teresa Miceli, B.S.N., RN, OCN
Myeloma Steering Committee
Rochester, MN Jane Perlmutter, Ph.D., M.B.A.
Clinical Imaging Steering Committee
Ann Arbor, MI Laura Porter, M.D., FASCO
Gastrointestinal Steering Committee
Cheverly, MD Laurel Pracht
Cancer Care Delivery Research Steering Committee
Sun City, AZ Sharon Rivera-Sanchez
Cancer Prevention Steering Committee
Glenn Allen, VA Linda Ryan
Gynecologic Cancer Steering Committee
DeLand, FL Nancy Sauers
Clinical Imaging Steering Committee
Holland, PA Mary Lou Smith, J.D., M.B.A.
Breast Cancer Steering Committee
Plano, TX Carla Strom, M.L.A.
Symptom Management and Health-Related Quality of Life Steering Committee
Winston-Salem, NC Helene Andrews-Polymenis, D.V.M., Ph.D.
Pancreas Task Force (GISC)
Bryan, TX Lisa Barr
Uterine Task Force (GCSC)
Brooklyn, NY Kenneth W. Brothers, J.D.
Bladder Task Force (GUSC)
Great Falls, VA Thelma Brown
Breast Immuno-Oncology Task Force (BCSC)
Birmingham, AL Marty Chakoian
Prostate Task Force (GUSC)
Alexandria, VA Julie Saliba Clauer, M.B.A.
Colon Task Force (GISC)
Burbank, CA Stephanie Cooper Greenberg
Bladder Task Force (GUSC)
Reisterstown, MD Dana Deighton
Esophagogastric Task Force (GISC)
Alexandria, VA William Dieterich
Previously Untreated Locally Advanced Disease (HNSC)
Funkstown, MD Ellen Dolinar
Uterine Task Force (GCSC)
Indianapolis, IN Rebecca Esparza, M.B.A.
Ovarian Task Force (GCSC)
Corpus Christi, TX Sandra Finestone, Psy.D.
Breast Oncology Local Disease Task Force (BCSC)
Irvine, CA Phuong Gallagher
Colon Task Force (GISC)
Pasadena, CA Manju George, Ph.D., D.V.M.
Rectal Anal Task Force (GISC)
Omaha, NE Kathryn Gilbert-Craig, B.B.A.
Pancreas Task Force (GISC)
Arlington, TN Kay Kays
Pancreas Task Force (GISC)
Sun City, AZ Alexander Kirk
Metastatic and Recurrent Disease Task Force (HNSC)
San Francisco, CA Lillian Renee Kreppel, B.S.
Rectal Anal Task Force (GISC)
New York, NY Brian L. Lewis, J.D.
Renal Task Force (GUSC)
Philadelphia, PA Stewart Lyman, Ph.D.
Metastatic and Recurrent Task Force (HNSC)
Nashville, TN Aisha McClellan
Cervical Task Force (GCSC)
Chapel Hill, NC Anne Meyn, M.Ed.
Breast Oncology Local Disease Task Force (BCSC)
Houston, TX David Neu
Metastatic and Recurrent Disease Task Force (HNSC)
Philadelphia, PA Susan Poteat
Renal Task Force (GUSC)
Dayton, OH Susan Rafte
Breast Immuno-Oncology Task Force (BCSC)
Houston, TX Willard Richardson
Rare Tumors Task Force (HNSC) Lourdes Rocha-Nussbaum
Hepatobiliary Cancer Task Force (GISC)
Golden, CO Sarah Schiltz, B.S.
Hepatobiliary Cancer Task Force (GISC)
Los Gatos, CA David B. Schrimmer, M.D.
Neuroendocrine Task Force (GISC)
Sacramento, CA Katherine Singley
Rare Tumors Task Force (HNSC)
Decatur, GA Dorinda Sparacio, M.S.
Ovarian Task Force (GCSC)
Hightstown, NJ Elizabeth Wiens
Previously Untreated Locally Advanced Task Force (HNSC)
Atlanta, GA James E. Williams, Jr., M.S., SPHR, Col (Ret.)
Prostate Task Force (GUSC)
Camp Hill, PA Mary Mitchell Zoeller, M.S.W.
Neuroendocrine Task Force (GISC)
Indianapolis, IN Elena Schwartz, Ph.D.elena.schwartz@nih.gov 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Stomach Cancer Diagnosis and Tests - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/stomach/diagnosis
txt: If you have symptoms that suggest stomach cancer, your doctor will need to find out if they’re due to cancer or another condition. They may ask about your personal and family medical history to learn about your possible risk factors for stomach cancer  do a physical exam, which will include feeling your abdomen for anything abnormal  run blood tests to check for anemia (a low red blood cell count), which could be a sign of bleeding in the stomach  check your stool for hidden (occult) blood, which could be a sign of bleeding in the stomach  Depending on these results, your doctor may recommend tests to find out if you have stomach cancer. The following tests and procedures are used to diagnose stomach cancer. The results will also help you and your doctor plan treatment. Upper endoscopy. A thin, lighted tube called an endoscope is inserted through the mouth and down the throat to check for abnormal areas in the esophagus, stomach, and first part of the small intestine. Upper endoscopy is a procedure to look inside the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum (first part of the small intestine) to check for abnormal areas. An endoscope (a thin, lighted tube) is passed through the mouth and down the throat into the esophagus. It may also have a tool to remove a sample of cells or tissue (biopsy) so a pathologist can view it under a microscope to check for signs of cancer. The sample of tissue may be checked for Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection and used for biomarker testing. Talk with your doctor to learn what to expect during and after your biopsy. To learn about the type of information that can be found in a pathologist's report about the cells or tissue removed during a biopsy, see Pathology Reports. Barium swallow is a series of x-rays of the esophagus and stomach. The patient drinks a liquid that contains barium (a silver-white metallic compound). The liquid coats the esophagus and stomach, and x-rays are taken. This procedure is also called an upper GI series. A CT scan uses a computer linked to an x-ray machine to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body from different angles. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. To learn more, see Computed Tomography (CT) Scans and Cancer. Biomarker testing is a way to look for genes, proteins, and other substances (called biomarkers or tumor markers) that can provide information about cancer. Some biomarkers affect how certain cancer treatments work. Biomarker testing may help you and your doctor choose a cancer treatment for you. To check for these biomarkers, samples of tissue containing stomach cancer cells are removed during a biopsy or surgery. The samples are tested in a laboratory to see whether the stomach cancer cells have these biomarkers. For stomach cancer, biomarker testing includes the following: HER2: The cancer cells may have larger than normal amounts of a protein called HER2.  PD-L1: The cells may have larger than normal amounts of an immune checkpoint protein called PD-L1.  Microsatellite instability: The cells may have microsatellite instability. This may be caused by mistakes that don’t get corrected when DNA is copied in a cell.  Mismatch repair deficiency: The cells may have a defect in a mismatch repair gene.  Tumor mutational burden: If the cells have a high tumor mutational burden, it means they have many gene mutations.  NTRK: The cells may have changes in one of the NTRK genes.  Learn more about Biomarker Testing for Cancer Treatment. Learn more about Stomach Cancer Treatment. Find information about a specific stage of stomach cancer, a factor that affects treatment. If you're diagnosed with stomach cancer, you will be referred to a gastrointestinal oncologist. This is a doctor who specializes in diagnosing and treating cancers of the stomach and intestines. Your doctor will recommend tests to find out if the cancer has spread and if so, how far. Sometimes the cancer is only in the stomach. Or, it may have spread from the stomach to other parts of the body. The process of learning the extent of cancer in the body is called staging. It is important to know the stage of the stomach cancer to plan treatment. The following imaging tests and procedures may be used to find out your stage: Endoscopic ultrasound is a procedure in which an endoscope is inserted into the body, usually through the mouth or rectum. An endoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. A probe at the end of the endoscope is used to bounce high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) off internal tissues or organs and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. This procedure is also called endosonography.  PET-CT scan combines the pictures from a positron emission tomography (PET) scan and a computed tomography (CT) scan. The PET and CT scans are done at the same time on the same machine. The pictures from both scans are combined to make a more detailed picture than either test would make by itself.  
	For the PET scan, a small amount of radioactive glucose is injected into a vein. The scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. Cancer cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells.   
For the CT scan, a series of detailed x-ray pictures of areas inside the body is taken from different angles. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium is a procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. A substance called gadolinium is injected into a vein. The gadolinium collects around the cancer cells so they show up brighter in the picture. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI).  Laparoscopy is a surgical procedure to look at the organs inside the abdomen to check for signs of disease. Small incisions (cuts) are made in the wall of the abdomen and a laparoscope (a thin, lighted tube) is inserted into one of the incisions. Other instruments may be inserted through the same or other incisions to perform procedures such as removing organs or taking tissue samples to be checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. A solution may be washed over the surface of the organs in the abdomen and then removed to collect cells. These cells are also looked at under a microscope to check for signs of cancer.  For the PET scan, a small amount of radioactive glucose is injected into a vein. The scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. Cancer cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells.  For the CT scan, a series of detailed x-ray pictures of areas inside the body is taken from different angles. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.  You may want to get a second opinion to confirm your stomach cancer diagnosis and treatment plan. If you seek a second opinion, you will need to get important medical test results and reports from the first doctor to share with the second doctor. The second doctor will review the pathology report, slides, and scans before giving a recommendation. The doctor who gives the second opinion may agree with your first doctor, suggest changes or another approach, or provide more information about your cancer. To learn more about choosing a doctor and getting a second opinion, see Finding Health Care Services. For questions you might want to ask at your appointments, see Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer. Get live help with finding a doctor, hospital, or getting a second opinion at 1-800-4-CANCER. NCI offers free information on cancer topics in English and Spanish. 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Zoledronic Acid - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/zoledronicacid
txt: This page contains brief information about zoledronic acid and a collection of links to more information about the use of this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Zoledronic acid is approved to be used alone or with other drugs to treat: Multiple myeloma and cancers that have spread to the bone. Hypercalcemia (high blood levels of calcium) caused by malignant cancer. Zoledronic acid is being studied in the treatment of other types of cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Zoledronic Acid - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Find Clinical Trials for Zoledronic Acid - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Personal Genomics Podcast - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/ccg/blog/personal-genomics-podcast
txt: On the Personal Genomics podcast, real people tell their personal stories about research. Personal Genomics is a podcast about people—people working in genomics research and facing a variety of scientific, technological, and personal challenges. From repurposing video games, to building something new and amazing, to becoming a patient, there’s a lot that happens behind the scenes that we don’t often talk about. The Center for Cancer Genomics (CCG) brings you personal stories from real people about the organic, messy process that is research. YouTube  YouTube Music    E5: A Tribute to Daniela Gerhard


Daniela Gerhard was known for her robust work ethic and love for science, but she also cared deeply for colleagues and cancer patients.  E4: Who is the Honey Badger?


Colleagues and friends of cancer genomics researcher Ken Scott discuss his vision for precision oncology, experience with a rare cancer, and his desire to be a honey badger.  E3: Family Portraits


Cancer researchers at different stages of their lives—in terms of both family and career—discuss their struggles, achievements, and outlook.  E2: Another Shot on Goal


Dr. Denise Wolf tells the story of her serendipitous path from electrical engineering to precision oncology research, and why studying something interesting was not enough.  E1: My First Genomic Study


In the mid 90’s, the idea of a genome-scale study seemed impossible or even crazy to some. Dr. Lou Staudt (director of CCG) talks about putting together one of the first cancer genomics studies for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.  Trailer: Personal Genomics – A Podcast from the Center for Cancer Genomics


From the Center for Cancer Genomics at the National Cancer Institute, a podcast exploring the narratives of cancer genomics researchers. Hear personal stories from researchers about what it’s like to work in one of the most complex areas of cancer research. Released in 2020.  Daniela Gerhard was known for her robust work ethic and love for science, but she also cared deeply for colleagues and cancer patients. Colleagues and friends of cancer genomics researcher Ken Scott discuss his vision for precision oncology, experience with a rare cancer, and his desire to be a honey badger. Cancer researchers at different stages of their lives—in terms of both family and career—discuss their struggles, achievements, and outlook. Dr. Denise Wolf tells the story of her serendipitous path from electrical engineering to precision oncology research, and why studying something interesting was not enough. In the mid 90’s, the idea of a genome-scale study seemed impossible or even crazy to some. Dr. Lou Staudt (director of CCG) talks about putting together one of the first cancer genomics studies for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. From the Center for Cancer Genomics at the National Cancer Institute, a podcast exploring the narratives of cancer genomics researchers. Hear personal stories from researchers about what it’s like to work in one of the most complex areas of cancer research. Released in 2020.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Mission - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/crchd/about/mission-vision
txt: The National Cancer Institute (NCI) established the Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities (CRCHD) in 2001 to help reduce the unequal burden of cancer in our society. To reduce cancer health disparities, CRCHD: Strengthens the NCI cancer research portfolio in basic, clinical, translational, and population-based research to address cancer health disparities through collaborations with NCI Divisions, Offices, and Centers.  Advises on strategic priorities, program direction, and scientific policy to strengthen cancer disparities research, diversity training, women’s health, and sexual and gender minority opportunities.  Leads NCI’s efforts in workforce diversity through the training of students and investigators from diverse backgrounds. 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: 2022 NCI Budget Fact Book - Funding Trends - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/budget/fact-book/historical-trends/personnel
txt: The table below displays NCI-staffing levels, by type of appointment, for fiscal years 2010-2022. Full-time equivalents represent 2,080 hours per person employed  Full-time and part-time appointments include employees from NIH Employment Report 71E  Training Fellows including visiting fellows, Cancer Research Training Award (CRTA) and the few remaining Intramural Research Training Award (IRTA), biotech, and tech transfers  Total employees include full-time and part-time permanent tours  Download the Data The figures for FY 2020 Full Time Permanent Appointment and FY 2020 Other than Full Time Permanent Appointment have been updated to reflect on-board counts rather than utilization rate.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Drugs Approved for Bladder Cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/bladder
txt: This page lists cancer drugs approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for bladder cancer. The list includes generic names and brand names. The drug names link to NCI’s Cancer Drug Information summaries. There may be drugs used in bladder cancer that are not listed here. Adstiladrin (Nadofaragene Firadenovec-vncg)  Avelumab  Balversa (Erdafitinib)  Bavencio (Avelumab)  Cisplatin  Doxorubicin Hydrochloride  Enfortumab Vedotin-ejfv  Erdafitinib  Jelmyto (Mitomycin)  Keytruda (Pembrolizumab)  Mitomycin  Nadofaragene Firadenovec-vncg  Nivolumab  Opdivo (Nivolumab)  Padcev (Enfortumab Vedotin-ejfv)  Pemazyre (Pemigatinib)  Pembrolizumab  Pemigatinib  Sacituzumab Govitecan-hziy  Tepadina (Thiotepa)  Thiotepa  Trodelvy (Sacituzumab Govitecan-hziy)  Valrubicin  Valstar (Valrubicin)  GEMCITABINE-CISPLATIN  MVAC 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Contracts and Small Business - Cancer Research - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/grants-training/contracts-business
txt: NCI’s Office of Acquisitions Negotiates, awards, and administers contracts and simplified acquisitions in support of the NCI’s mission. SBIR/STTR contracts Small Business Innovation contract is issued once a year, normally around the fall, and has a single receipt date. Contract solicitations are accepted only if they respond directly to a research topic within the SBIR contract solicitation.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Clinical Trial Sequencing Program (CTSP) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/ccg/research/genome-sequencing/ctsp
txt: An NCI clinical researcher discusses a clinical trial with a prospective patient. NCI’s CCG and Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis (DCTD) are engaged in a collaboration named Clinical Trial Sequencing Project (CTSP). This project has launched out of a joint aspiration to promote the use of genomics in NCI-sponsored clinical trials of the National Clinical Trials Network (NCTN). CTSP’s goal is to elucidate the molecular basis of response and resistance to therapies studied. Biospecimens collected from NCI-sponsored NCTN clinical trials will undergo whole genome or whole exome sequencing in conjunction with transcriptome sequencing to identify genomic alterations important to the hypotheses stated in the proposals. The genomic and anonymized clinical data from CTSP will be made publically available in the Genomic Data Commons (GDC) to benefit the cancer research community. The cancer types currently under study are breast cancer, renal cell carcinoma, and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Trial Assigning Individualized Options for Treatment (TAILORx) is an NCI-sponsored clinical trial investigating whether some breast cancer patients may be treated effectively without undergoing chemotherapy, and if a gene expression test can help choose the best individualized treatment. CCG’s study of breast cancer tissue from TAILORx aims to illuminate the molecular basis of ER-positive, Her2-negative breast cancer response and recurrence, and to provide vital genomic information about breast cancer treatments and outcomes to the cancer research community. The trial enrolled over 10,000 women with estrogen receptor-positive (ER-positive), human epidermal growth factor-negative (Her2-negative) breast cancer that had not spread to the lymph nodes. Each patient’s tumor was evaluated with a gene expression test for the probability of cancer recurrence following surgical removal. The trial grouped patients based on the score obtained from the gene expression test, into low, middle, and high chance of recurrence. All patients with a high risk of recurrence received chemotherapy, as did randomly assigned middle-risk patients; low-risk patients received hormone therapy only and were spared chemotherapy. Initial results published in the New England Journal of Medicine indicate that low-risk women fare well when spared chemotherapy and that the gene expression test is a clinically helpful tool for determining the best treatment for individual patients. CCG will receive tissue samples of renal cell carcinoma (RCC), the most common kidney cancer in adults, from a recent NCI-sponsored clinical trial that tested the effectiveness of two inhibitors of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in patients with high-risk, non-metastatic RCC. Abnormal activity of the VEGF pathway drives RCC by stimulating the development of blood vessels that provide nutrients to the tumor. Inhibition of VEGF has been shown to be effective for the treatment of advanced RCC that has metastasized to other areas of the body. However, patients with high-risk, non-metastatic disease treated with sunitinib or sorafenib, both VEGF inhibitors, received no benefit compared to patients who received a placebo following surgical removal of their tumors. CCG will analyze approximately 400 tissue samples from the ECOG-ACRIN E2805 trial of sunitinib and sorafenib to learn more about genomic drivers of RCC development, metastasis, and recurrence. CCG will perform a comprehensive molecular analysis of tissue samples of Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma (DLBCL), the most common adult non-Hodgkin lymphoma, from a Phase III clinical trial run by Cancer and Leukemia Group B. The trial, Rituximab and Combination Chemotherapy in Treating Patients With Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma (NCT00118209) treated 430 DLBCL patients with rituximab, an antibody that targets B cells for destruction, in combination with one of two different chemotherapy regimens. By randomly assigning patients to either R-CHOP or Dose Adjusted-EPOCH-R, the study aims to establish which chemotherapy best complements rituximab in the treatment of DLBCL and to develop a molecular predictor of patient responses. The goal of CCG’s in-depth analysis of the DNA, RNA, and protein of DLBCL samples from this trial is to bolster the findings with rich molecular data and to add key information, including multi-platform analysis of DLBCL subtypes and predictors of tumor resistance.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Lung Adenocarcinoma Study - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/ccg/research/genome-sequencing/tcga/studied-cancers/lung-adenocarcinoma-study
txt: What is lung cancer? Lung cancer accounts for more deaths than any other cancer in both men and women, about 28% of all cancer deaths. In 2010, an estimated 222,520 Americans were expected to have been diagnosed with lung cancer and 157,300 were expected to have died from the disease.1 The prognosis for lung cancer is poor; most lung cancer patients are diagnosed with advanced cancer and only 16% of patients will survive for five years after their diagnosis. In this work, TCGA researchers studied the most common type of lung cancer called non-small cell lung cancers. Specifically, the subtypes are called lung adenocarcinoma and lung squamous cell carcinoma. Additional information on lung cancer. What have TCGA researchers learned about lung adenocarcinoma? Found further evidence that lung adenocarcinoma has a high rate of mutations compared to other cancers.  76% of cases studied harbored activation of a variety of receptor tyrosine kinase pathways, which alter signaling and causes increased cell proliferation. The activation may be caused by:
	18 significantly mutated genes, including previously known drivers KRAS, EGFR, and BRAF
Novel oncogenic drivers, such as tumor suppressor NF1, which normally keep receptor tyrosine kinase signaling in check  The cancer can be categorized into three distinct subtypes based on gene expression data:
	Proximal proliferative, proximal inflammatory, and terminal respiratory unit  18 significantly mutated genes, including previously known drivers KRAS, EGFR, and BRAF  Novel oncogenic drivers, such as tumor suppressor NF1, which normally keep receptor tyrosine kinase signaling in check  Proximal proliferative, proximal inflammatory, and terminal respiratory unit 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/infrastructure/cancer-centers/find/northwesternlurie
txt: Leonidas C. Platanias, M.D., Ph.D., Director Chicago,       Illinois Main: 312-695-0990 Visit Website First established in 1974, the Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University became an NCI-Designated Comprehensive Cancer Center in 1997. Dedicated to overcoming cancer through scientific discovery, advancing medical knowledge, providing state-of-the-art cancer care, and training the next generation of physicians and scientists, the Lurie Cancer Center has a long-standing commitment to advocacy, education, outreach, and engagement. The Lurie Cancer Center unites physicians and scientists from Northwestern University’s campuses in Evanston and Chicago. Working together across disciplines, they bring their combined skills and expertise to patients at four Chicago teaching hospitals: Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, Shirley Ryan AbilityLab, and the Jesse Brown VA Medical Center. Fueled by advances in research, Lurie Cancer Center and its affiliated hospitals provide comprehensive care for nearly 16,000 new patients each year. A wide range of specialized programs and services support patients from diagnosis through treatment and survivorship, including dynamic supportive oncology, fertility preservation, and survivorship programs. Collaborative research opportunities spanning 35 academic departments across four schools enable Lurie Cancer Center investigators to integrate the spectrum of basic, clinical, and population-based research, and explore new ways to bridge these scientific areas. Based on their research focus, members are organized into eight formal research programs: Cancer Epigenetics and Nuclear Dynamics; Tumor Environment and Metastasis; Membranes; Organelles and Metabolism; Cancer and Physical Sciences; Cancer Prevention; Cancer Control and Survivorship; Translational Research in Solid Tumors; and Hematologic Malignancies. Lurie Cancer Center’s members benefit from access to 15 shared resources providing services, equipment, and expertise that are fundamental to understanding the biology and clinical manifestations of cancer. These research programs include NCI Specialized Programs of Research Excellence (SPOREs) grants in brain cancer and prostate cancer, and a comprehensive clinical trials program offering access to more than 300 interventional clinical trials. Lurie Cancer Center’s Clinical Trials Office provides a centralized resource to conduct phase 1 through phase 3 trials investigating a full spectrum of diagnostic and treatment strategies. Lurie Cancer Center is a Lead Academic Participating Site, providing scientific leadership in the design and conduct of clinical research within the National Clinical Trials Network, and a participant in the NCI’s Experimental Therapeutics Clinical Trials Network. The Lurie Cancer Center is pioneering initiatives to improve the lives of patients and advance the quality of cancer care worldwide, including: The Center for Cancer Nanotechnology Excellence, using Spherical Nucleic Acids to gain access to intracellular environments, discovers new aspects of cancer biology and creative effective new treatment options.  The Translational Bridge Program, established to propel laboratory research into clinical trials and educate a new generation of investigators. The program partners a Lurie Cancer Center investigator with a clinician to mentor and supervise a postdoctoral fellow.  Community partnerships and programs to identify and address barriers to cancer health equity and improve outcomes in underserved neighborhoods, including the Chicago Cancer Initiative, the Center for Health Equity Transformation, and the Chicago Cancer Health Equity Collaborative.  The Center for Global Oncology, which works to advance oncology education, research, and treatment in underserved areas around the world.  An innovative CAR T-Cell Therapy Program and a Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant Program that leads the region in volume and types of transplants, averaging more than 350 transplantations per year with survival rates that consistently exceed the national survival rates.  The OncoSET Precision Medicine Program, which is advancing genomic technologies to determine the most effective course of personalized cancer therapy.  The Center for Cancer Nanotechnology Excellence, using Spherical Nucleic Acids to gain access to intracellular environments, discovers new aspects of cancer biology and creative effective new treatment options. The Translational Bridge Program, established to propel laboratory research into clinical trials and educate a new generation of investigators. The program partners a Lurie Cancer Center investigator with a clinician to mentor and supervise a postdoctoral fellow. Community partnerships and programs to identify and address barriers to cancer health equity and improve outcomes in underserved neighborhoods, including the Chicago Cancer Initiative, the Center for Health Equity Transformation, and the Chicago Cancer Health Equity Collaborative. The Center for Global Oncology, which works to advance oncology education, research, and treatment in underserved areas around the world. An innovative CAR T-Cell Therapy Program and a Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant Program that leads the region in volume and types of transplants, averaging more than 350 transplantations per year with survival rates that consistently exceed the national survival rates. The OncoSET Precision Medicine Program, which is advancing genomic technologies to determine the most effective course of personalized cancer therapy. *This profile was provided by the Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: DCB - DNA and Chromosome Aberrations Research - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/research-portfolio/dcar
txt: Research on DNA and chromosome aberrations uses molecular and genome-wide methods for genomic characterization and to study genetic variation, gene regulation, DNA damage, DNA repair, and genomic instability. These studies provide critical insight into pathways that control tumor formation and progression to malignancy. Research in this area is supported and directed by the DNA and Chromosome Aberrations Branch (DCAB). Gene regulation and epigenetics research focuses on the aberrant expression of genes that regulate normal cell function, which is a hallmark of cancer cells. This regulation often involves altering the ability of the DNA to organize with histone proteins into a higher-order chromatin structure that is permissive for gene expression. Key research areas include: Chemical and structural modifications of DNA and RNA, and associated proteins  Enzymes involved in the modification of DNA and histones (e.g., methylation,  acetylation, etc.)  Chromatin architectural proteins that mediate higher-order chromatin structure or control DNA accessibility and regulate gene expression  Altered chromatin assembly, architecture and domain structure  Characterization of major regulatory regions of DNA involved in gene expression and their interacting proteins  Identification and role of non-coding RNAs in regulating gene expression  Emerging research areas include epigenetic changes that drive pediatric solid tumors, the role of phase separation in nuclear organization and compartmentalization, and oncogenic histone-alterations. Certain chromosomal aberrations are hallmarks of tumor initiation and progression. Genomic instability arises as a result of carcinogen-induced and endogenous DNA damage, including altered fidelity of DNA replication and translesion DNA polymerases. The resulting lesions encompass a wide spectrum of defects ranging from localized point mutations to large chromosomal rearrangements, such as deletions, amplifications, inversions, translocations, and duplications. Key research areas include: Mechanisms involved in mitotic chromosome segregation and chromosome imbalance, translocations, and fragile sites  Telomere alterations, mechanisms of telomerase function, and alternative telomere maintenance pathways in cancer initiation and progression  Genomic instability arising during DNA replication stress  Role of oncogenes in promoting genomic instability and the impact of transcription on genome integrity  Emerging research areas include understanding RNA metabolism and RNA:DNA hybrids (R loops) in genomic instability, the roles of telomeres in cell death and DNA repair, and mechanisms and cellular consequences of catastrophic chromosomal events like chromothripsis. Research in cancer genetics focuses on the identification, mapping, and characterization of genetic changes involved in tumor initiation and progression. Key research areas include: Studies of intra-tumoral genetic heterogeneity and clonal evolution  Functional genomics, including the role of cancer gene variants and single nucleotide polymorphisms  Application of model systems for gene discovery and genetic screens to identify loci that cooperate with known cancer genes  Genes activated or repressed by radiation and chemical exposure  The role of genetic variation in cancer health disparities  Emerging areas of interest are the role of chromosome translocations in solid tumor development, the study of extrachromosomal DNA in oncogene amplification and the use of mutational signatures to identify defective cellular pathways (e.g., DNA repair) in tumors. Research in this area encompasses a wide range of DNA repair pathways, including nucleotide and base excision repair, transcription-coupled repair processes, homologous recombination, non-homologous and alternative end-joining processes, cross-link repair and mismatch repair. An understanding of the DNA repair defects that underlie genomic instability in cancer can be used to design strategies to selectively target cancer cells. Key research areas include: The repair of DNA lesions and DNA breaks induced by carcinogens, mutagens, reactive oxygen species, chemotherapeutic agents, and ionizing/non-ionizing radiation  Lesion-induced conformational changes in DNA and how altered nuclear and chromatin integrity affect DNA repair  Regulators of DNA repair pathway choice and their potential as cancer vulnerabilities  Emerging areas include the repair of stalled or collapsed replication forks and effectors of replication restart during replication stress, mechanism of alternative end-joining and their role in mutagenic DNA repair, and mechanisms of mitochondrial DNA repair. In addition, there are emerging efforts to design therapeutic strategies that target vulnerabilities of cancer cells that carry defects in DNA repair or DNA damage signaling. Studies dissecting the cellular response to DNA damage focus on signaling events and pathways in the nucleus, cytoplasm, and mitochondria of normal and transformed human cells, during different phases of the cell cycle, and in non-dividing indolent states. Key research areas include: How cells sense DNA lesions/chromosomal damage and activate DNA damage response (DDR) signaling  DNA damage-induced cell death  DDR checkpoint failure and mitotic catastrophe  Activation of immune signaling by DNA damage  An emerging research area investigates the connection between genomic instability and the activation of immune sensors, such as cGAS/STING or RIG-I, to modulate immune signaling. Identifying and understanding the mechanisms by which chemical and physical carcinogens initiate and promote tumors are important in determining how environmental exposures can contribute to cancer. Carcinogenic agents include chemical mutagens, tobacco smoke, toxins, ultraviolet light, radiation, asbestos, and reactive oxidative species. Key research areas include: Mechanisms of carcinogenesis by DNA adduct generation or the alteration of signaling pathways  Formation, detection and metabolism of chemical carcinogens  Mechanisms of DNA mutagenesis and characterization of DNA lesions induced by chemicals, ultraviolet light, ionizing radiation, and endogenous reactive oxygen species  Mechanisms of cancer initiation and promotion by radiation, chemicals, and physical agents  Emerging research areas are the toxicity of cannabis and nontraditional tobacco products (e.g., electronic cigarettes, heat-not-burn products and water pipes) and the use of mutational signatures to link environmental exposures to cancer.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Case Comprehensive Cancer Center - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/infrastructure/cancer-centers/find/casewestern
txt: Gary K. Schwartz, M.D., Director Cleveland,       Ohio Main: (216) 368-1122 Visit Website The Case Comprehensive Cancer Center (Case CCC) at Case Western Reserve University was both founded and became an NCI-designated cancer center in 1987. It was recognized as an NCI-designated comprehensive cancer center 11 years later. In 2004, the institutional and membership base from the founding partnership between Case Western Reserve and Ireland Cancer Center of University Hospitals (UH) expanded to include the Cleveland Clinic. Cancer research and care at these three institutions are now unified under the leadership of the Case CCC. In addition, the freestanding cancer hospital at UH, the Jane and Lee Seidman Cancer Center, open in Spring 2011. The mission of the Case CCC is fourfold. The first goal is to improve the prevention, diagnosis, and therapy of cancer through discovery, evaluation, and dissemination. The second goal is to stimulate and support innovative, coordinated interdisciplinary clinical research on cancer diagnosis, treatment, prevention, and control. The third objective is to develop clinical applications of discovery and make these available to northern Ohio residents as quickly as possible through the integrated efforts of the major health systems in the region. The fourth goal is to develop cancer prevention and control activities that build on the expertise of the Center and result in a reduction of cancer morbidity and mortality in the northern Ohio region and throughout the nation. The Case CCC is organized into nine interdisciplinary scientific programs that together include more than 350 members across its affiliated institutions. The programs include: cancer genetics; cell death regulation; cancer cell signaling; genitourinary malignancies; normal and neoplastic stem cells; developmental therapeutics; cancer prevention, control, and population research; and aging-cancer research. Cancer imaging, once part of the developmental therapeutics program, is now a separate program in development. Program members work collaboratively within and across all programs on a broad range of topics. These research initiatives extend to local affiliates such as the MetroHealth Medical Center and the Louis Stokes Cleveland VA Medical Center, as well as to the 13 community medical centers operated by UH and Cleveland Clinic. Patients benefit from the latest research on understanding and treating cancer. They have access to a full range of services, from basic research information to advanced treatments, psychosocial, and supportive care. Teams of medical professionals design individualized patient care plans. Additionally, patients have access to a wide range of clinical trials. The Case CCC participates in an active outreach program for clinical practice-based prevention and screening initiatives, educational programs, minority recruitment, and patient referrals. Highlights of the outreach programs include Project Safe Conduct, a collaboration between the Case CCC and the Hospice of the Western Reserve, and Project T.E.M.P.L.E. (Teaching, Educating, Mentoring, Preventing, Learning, and Empowering), a project to assist underserved African American women in greater Cleveland. The Case CCC offers a full spectrum of training and education programs, ranging from undergraduate programs through medical school to postdoctoral opportunities. Both clinical and research training is offered to residents and clinical fellows. * This profile was provided by the Case Comprehensive Cancer Center.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Symptom Management - Cancer Moonshot Recommendation - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/key-initiatives/moonshot-cancer-initiative/implementation/symptom-management
txt:  Analyzing and Interpreting Clinician and Patient Adverse Event Data to Better Understand Tolerability  Translation and Validation of Patient-Reported Outcome (PRO) Measures to Address an Accrual Barrier to Minority and Underserved Participation in Symptom Clinical Trials  Improving the Management of symPtoms during and following Cancer Treatment (IMPACT)  Improving Outcomes for Pediatric, Adolescent and Young Adult (AYA) Cancer Survivors  Graft-Versus-Host Disease (GVHD) Symptom Management  Optimizing the Management and Outcomes for Cancer Survivors Transitioning to Follow-up Care  Projects Awarded Cancer Moonshot Funding to Address Symptom Management  Analyzing and Interpreting Clinician and Patient Adverse Event Data to Better Understand Tolerability Translation and Validation of Patient-Reported Outcome (PRO) Measures to Address an Accrual Barrier to Minority and Underserved Participation in Symptom Clinical Trials Improving the Management of symPtoms during and following Cancer Treatment (IMPACT) Improving Outcomes for Pediatric, Adolescent and Young Adult (AYA) Cancer Survivors Graft-Versus-Host Disease (GVHD) Symptom Management Optimizing the Management and Outcomes for Cancer Survivors Transitioning to Follow-up Care Projects Awarded Cancer Moonshot Funding to Address Symptom Management NCI has announced several funding opportunities that align with the Cancer Moonshot. Cancer patients often experience unpleasant side effects that can contribute to lower health-related quality of life, lead to costly emergency visits to the hospital, and cause treatment delays or non-adherence to a therapy. Poorly controlled symptoms increase risks for poor outcomes and the likelihood of a patient not being able to return to work. Also, patients from racial/ethnic minority groups, older age groups, and underserved populations often experience mismanaged symptom control, have significant delays in--or stop adhering to--treatment, and have limited access to symptom management approaches. Helping patients manage intolerable side effects and improving their functioning may support the likelihood that they will adhere to treatments that are effective. Successful symptom management will require the systematic gathering of patient-reported outcomes data and evidence-based symptom management data for patients from diverse populations. This recommendation supports the development of research to accelerate the implementation of guidelines for routine monitoring and management of patient-reported symptoms in all populations. Such research includes the examination of patient-reported symptoms and the support of intervention studies to determine the best approaches for symptom control and supportive care for cancer patients in routine clinical practice. Since patients at different points on the cancer continuum have a variety of needs, research will investigate patients’ symptoms and functioning from diagnosis through survivorship or end-of-life, and will include patients throughout the course of their lives. The ultimate goal of symptom management research supported by this recommendation is to reduce harmful symptoms experienced by cancer patients and decrease cancer care costs related to poorly controlled symptoms. Currently, NCI has awarded funding opportunities that align with the recommendation to address treatment side effects: Analyzing and Interpreting Clinician and Patient Adverse Event Data to Better Understand Tolerability NCI has created a consortium of multidisciplinary teams that is developing new methods for analyzing patient-reported outcomes in the setting of cancer clinical trials to better define patient tolerability. Researchers in the consortium are using the Patient-Reported Outcomes version of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (PRO-CTCAE), other patient-reported outcome (PRO) data, and clinical data for their analyses. This information will help researchers, clinicians, and patients understand the symptomatic side effects of cancer treatments. The multidisciplinary teams of data scientists, clinical researchers, and experts in patient-reported data are addressing current limitations of clinician-reported adverse events, analysis of symptoms at baseline, and methods to display/communicate adverse event data. Projects in the network are leveraging patient-reported data from existing trials and seek to establish a proof-of-principle for analyzing and interpreting PRO-CTCAE data. Findings from this network will shed light on the degree to which patients tolerate different cancer treatments. Additional information about the program can be found at the Cancer Treatment Tolerability Consortium website. Translation and Validation of Patient-Reported Outcome (PRO) Measures to Address an Accrual Barrier to Minority and Underserved Participation in Symptom Clinical Trials Endpoints in symptom management clinical trials are mainly appraised using PRO measures; however, many symptom-specific PRO measures are neither widely available in, nor culturally adapted for, languages other than English. The NCI Community Oncology Research Program (NCORP) identified the lack of translated PROs as a significant barrier for the participation of non-English and low-English speaking patients within minority and underserved populations in symptom management trials. To address the current language barrier that limits participation in symptom management trials, this initiative will support the translation, validation, and cultural adaptation of PRO measures into multiple languages. NCORP investigators will identify commonly used PRO measures in their symptom management trials that are currently not available to non-English and low-English speaking patients. These PROs will be translated into languages other than English identified by the NCORP sites. By translating PRO measures, this project aims to improve symptom care for non-English speaking and low-English proficient cancer patients and cancer survivors, as well as to enhance the diversity of patients participating in symptom management trials. Improving the Management of symPtoms during and following Cancer Treatment (IMPACT) This collaborative research consortium is implementing and evaluating systematic symptom management in cancer care delivery to improve symptom control for cancer patients during and following treatment. The consortium consists of three individual Research Centers (RCs) that are deploying integrated electronic systems to monitor and manage cancer symptoms in diverse practice settings, as well as a Coordinating Center (CC) that provides scientific expertise and logistical support to unite the consortium. The three RCs within the IMPACT Consortium are deploying integrated symptom monitoring and management systems in diverse clinical practices and testing the effects of those systems on patient outcomes, cancer treatment delivery, and healthcare utilization. The IMPACT Coordinating Center supports Consortium-wide logistics and research activities, including standardized protocols and data sharing. The aim of the IMPACT initiative is to set the foundation for effective, scalable, and sustainable symptom management approaches in routine cancer care. Pragmatic trials conducted through the IMPACT Consortium are determining the best models for implementing symptom management approaches, understanding the utility of using systems to reduce the harmful effects of poorly controlled symptoms in cancer patients, and building a foundation for the development of effective symptom management tools in routine clinical care. The IMPACT Consortium, leveraging research at RCs and their clinical practices, uses implementation science to help accelerate the adoption of systematic approaches that can improve symptom management for cancer patients and survivors across the United States. More information about the consortium can be found at the IMPACT Consortium website. Improving Outcomes for Pediatric, Adolescent and Young Adult (AYA) Cancer Survivors The NCI Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program estimates that there are more than 630,000 cancer survivors between the ages 0 to 39 in the United States. Studies suggest that over 60% of these cancer survivors will suffer from physical, psychosocial, or behavioral side effects related to their disease or treatment, even years after the completion of therapy. These adverse effects can significantly impair survival and quality of life outcomes for Pediatric, Adolescent and Young Adult (AYA) cancer survivors. Research projects focused on improving outcomes for AYA cancer survivors are developing interventions to prevent, mitigate, and manage adverse, long-term disease- and treatment-related adverse effects for survivors of pediatric and AYA cancers across their lifespans. Investigators are also examining approaches to improve the delivery of cancer care to diverse pediatric and AYA cancer survivors, including minority and medically underserved populations. This program aims to reduce the harmful, adverse physical, behavioral, and psychosocial effects in survivors of these specific cancers. Additionally, this Cancer Moonshot program is supported by the Childhood Cancer Survivorship, Treatment, Access, and Research (STAR) Act, a bipartisan childhood cancer bill designed to advance pediatric and AYA cancer research and treatments, improve cancer surveillance, and enhance resources for survivors and their families. Graft-Versus-Host Disease (GVHD) Symptom Management Chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) is a major complication that can occur after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, a therapy often used to treat blood cancers. In GVHD, the stem cells from a donor (or the graft) attack the healthy tissues of the recipient patient (or host). GVHD produces multi-system organ complications that often mimic autoimmune conditions, resulting in significant disability and symptom burden. Currently, there is no pediatric patient-reported outcome measure of chronic GVHD symptoms. Researchers with NCI’s Center for Cancer Research (CCR) and Outcomes Research Branch (ORB) are conducting a two-phase study to refine and validate a pediatric chronic GVHD symptom scale (PCSS). This new measure will improve the way that chronic GVHD symptoms are evaluated and managed in children and adolescents ages 5 to 17. Researchers are also developing a companion measure that can be completed by a parent-proxy. This study will yield a well-validated measure for use in children and adolescents with GVHD. This new pediatric measure can be integrated into clinical trials and care delivery for pediatric transplant survivors to improve the precision and accuracy with which their GVHD symptom experience is captured. Ultimately, this study will provide new tools and insights that can be used to accelerate research to prevent, mitigate, and manage chronic GVHD, thereby improving outcomes for pediatric and adolescent cancer survivors. Optimizing the Management and Outcomes for Cancer Survivors Transitioning to Follow-up Care In 2016, there were an estimated 15.5 million cancer survivors in the United States, and this number is projected to grow to over 26 million survivors by 2040. Further, the transition from active treatment to posttreatment follow-up care is a critical period for cancer survivors. During this time, cancer survivors often experience a loss of their safety net and frequently have unique posttreatment needs, including monitoring for recurrence and second cancers, mitigating chronic or late effects of cancer and its treatment, and managing comorbid conditions. Thus, cancer survivors need the delivery of comprehensive, coordinated, and continuing care after the completion of treatment. Research Projects funded through the Optimizing the Management and Outcomes for Cancer Survivors Transitioning to Follow-up Care program are developing and/or scaling-up innovative and effective multi-level interventions that improve the delivery of post-treatment follow-up care and outcomes for survivors of adult cancers. Specifically, these projects are designing and testing approaches for follow-up care that enhance communication, collaboration, and coordination among different clinicians involved in the transition of a broad spectrum of adult cancer survivors from treatment to follow up care. Projects Awarded Cancer Moonshot Funding to Address Symptom Management
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Cancer Clinical Trial Leadership and Management Program - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/cgh/funding/clinical-trial-leadership-management
txt: Free, short U.S.-based training program for cancer clinical trials nurse managers from the island of Ireland  Helps facilitate cross-border and transatlantic knowledge sharing as part of the All-Ireland Cancer Consortium (AICC)  Participants spend time at NCI and have the opportunity to tour the National Institutes of Health Clinical Center, review education offerings, and meet with representatives from NCI's Center for Cancer Research, Office of Communications and Education, and Division of Cancer Prevention  For those from the Republic of Ireland, the Health Research Board (HRB) offers a grant toward travel, accommodation, and subsistence  Areas of focus include: Quality control and internal audit procedures
Trial staffing and protocol adherence
Clinical Research Nursing career paths
Specific items of interest depending on the participant's individual objectives for the program  In addition to training at NCI, the nurse managers visit Georgetown University Medical Center and meet with the research nurse manager from Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center and the nurse manager from Georgetown's Clinical Research Unit  Quality control and internal audit procedures  Trial staffing and protocol adherence  Clinical Research Nursing career paths  Specific items of interest depending on the participant's individual objectives for the program  You must be a cancer clinical trials nurse manager from the island of Ireland  Applications must come from targeted hospitals only - the call for applications is delivered in writing to eligible stakeholders  Places will be allocated to those fitting the following criteria, listed in order of preference: Manage a team of cancer trial research nurses in one of the targeted hospitals
Nurses with two years full-time experience in cancer trials, currently employed through ICORG-led trials and working in satellite cancer unit  Manage a team of cancer trial research nurses in one of the targeted hospitals  Nurses with two years full-time experience in cancer trials, currently employed through ICORG-led trials and working in satellite cancer unit  Elisabeth DupontCenter for Global HealthU.S. National Cancer Institutec/o NCI-CGH Europe Liaison OfficeBrussels, BelgiumE-mail: elisabeth.dupont@nih.gov
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Plans and Decisions for End-of-Life Care as a Cancer Caregiver - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/advanced-cancer/caregivers/planning
txt: Sometimes, as the disease progresses, changes take place in the person with cancer. These may be due to the side effects of treatment or the cancer itself. Or they may be caused by other drugs. Some caregivers have said that they wished they had known sooner about what changes to expect. Changes may occur in: looks  personality or mood  memory  sleep  appetite or nutrition needs  The person you're caring for may or may not go through any of these changes. But you should ask the doctor whether you need to be aware of them and what you can do about them if they happen. No one told us what these pills would do. My partner started to have mood swings and get really angry at me for no reason. Her nurse told me later that this was common when taking these drugs, but how was I supposed to know that? Ashley After deciding on choices for care, sometimes questions arise about whether the person with advanced cancer should live at home or be moved to a nursing or assisted living facility. When making these decisions, here are a few good questions to ask: What kind of help does your loved one need?  If you’re the spouse or other person living with them, are you capable of taking care of them?  If they live alone, is it risky for them to keep doing so?  What are the options for home care?  How often will they need help?  You’ll also need to consider how your loved one feels. They may fear: losing their independence  being seen as weak or a burden to others  moving to a health care or other type of assisted living facility  Sometimes it's easier to consider a change in living arrangements when the advice comes from a health professional. Social workers, including visiting nurses, those who work with older adults, and others may be able to help you talk to your loved one about these decisions. What do you say to someone with terminal cancer? Whether it’s a spouse, family member, or friend, talking about serious issues is never easy. It’s normal to not know what to say to someone with end-stage cancer, or to worry that you’ll say the wrong thing. But the most important thing is not what you say, but that you're showing you care. This section offers advice on how to talk about terminal cancer. Your loved one with cancer may want to go to our patient section, Talking about Your Advanced Cancer, for tips as well. It’s likely that you and your loved one with cancer are both having the same thoughts and fears about the end of life. There will come a time when you will need to talk about these issues together. These might include: the stage of the cancer  preparing for the future  fears about death  wishes at the end of life  Some families talk openly about these sorts of things, while others don’t. There's no right or wrong way to connect. But studies show that families who talk things out feel better about the care they get and the decisions they make. A few things to remember are: You and your loved one can still have hope for comfort, peace, and acceptance. It's a good idea to talk about the fact that the future is uncertain. Avoiding important issues only makes them harder to deal with later. Talking over your concerns can bring comfort to all involved.  Keeping the truth from each other isn’t helpful. It's important to get any thoughts or concerns you both have out in the open. You may find that you both are thinking the same things. Or you may find you’re thinking very different things.  Often the best way to communicate with someone is to just listen. This is one of the main ways of showing that you’re there for them. It’s important to be supportive of whatever your loved one wants to say. It’s their life and their cancer. They need to process thoughts and fears in their own time and their own way.  Bringing up issues related to terminal cancer can be tough. You may think, for example, that your loved one needs to try a different treatment or see a different doctor. Or they may be worried about losing independence, being seen as weak, or being a burden to you. What's important to remember is that your loved one has the right to choose how to live the rest of their life. Although you may have strong opinions about what they should do, the decision is theirs to make. Below are some tips on how to bring up hard topics. Practice what you’ll say in advance.  Find a quiet time. Ask if it’s an okay time to talk.  Know what your goals are having this talk. What do you want as the result?  Speak from your heart.  Allow time for your loved one to talk. Listen and try not to interrupt.  You don’t always have to say, “It’ll be okay.”  Some people won’t start a conversation themselves, but may respond if you start first. But if you have trouble talking about painful issues, ask for professional advice. A counselor or other mental health expert may be able to help you and your loved one explore topics that you don’t feel able to on your own. And if they don't want to go to the counselor with you, you can always go alone. You may hear some ideas for how to bring up these topics. You can also talk about other concerns and feelings that you're dealing with right now. Instead of: Dad, you are going to be just fine.Try: Dad, are there some things that worry you? Instead of: Don’t talk like that! You can beat this!Try: It must be hard to come to terms with all of this. Instead of: I can’t see how anyone can help anymore.Try: We will be there for you always. Instead of: What do the doctors know? You might live forever.Try: Do you think the doctors are right? How does it seem to you? Instead of: Please don’t give up. I need you here.Try: I will miss you terribly. But we will get through somehow. Instead of: There has to be something more to try.Try: Let’s be sure to get the best of medical treatments, but we will be together when we have done all we can. Instead of: Don’t be glum. You’ll get well.Try: It must be hard. Can I just sit with you for a while? From J. Lynn, J. Harrold, and J.L. Schuster. Handbook for Mortals: Guidance for People Facing Serious Illness. Oxford University Press: New York, NY. 2011. Reprinted with permission. A terminal cancer diagnosis brings up a number of decisions to make. These may be about what type of care or treatment to receive. Or they may be about the kind of information patients and loved ones want to hear. Or deciding where to continue getting care. For many families, it's important that the person with cancer be in charge of making decisions. Yet in some families and also in some cultures, it's common for family caregivers to make most of the decisions. And they may make them with or without the patient knowing. Or, sometimes the patient wants the caregiver to make all the decisions. Making these decisions may be hard on you for a number of reasons including: Your own desires for your loved one’s care may make it hard to decide what is best for them.  Your ideas about how to move forward may differ from those of other family members and friends.  The person with cancer may have different beliefs about care than you or other loved ones.  The opinions of your health care team may differ from the patient’s or yours.  If you and your loved one with advanced cancer have different thoughts about next steps for care, you should talk about your opinions with each other. However, in the end, it's their choice. If you can't agree, you may want to ask someone else to guide the conversation between you both. You might talk to a member of your faith community, a social worker, other people dealing with cancer, or a hospice worker. There may also come a time when you have to make medical decisions for your loved one because they can't anymore. It's important to get a sense of how they feel about certain issues while they can still tell you. For example, who would they like to be in charge of their medical decisions? Have they signed advance directives to express what kind of care they want to receive? Knowing what your loved one wants may mean letting go of some of your own opinions. For example, you may want to keep them alive, whatever it takes. But they may wish to stop receiving life-sustaining measures at a certain point. Try to keep things in perspective by looking at how the disease has advanced. Listen to the doctors and others who are giving care. Get the facts about the care you wish your loved one would get versus what is being given. If advance directives can’t be found and your loved one can’t speak for themselves, you may feel anxious and stressed as you decide what choices to make for their care. Think about what they would want, or imagine what they would say if they could talk. Try to remember if something was said in the past that would help you decide. Know that it’s common for family members to disagree on what kind of care to give your loved one. If this is the case for you, ask a member of your health care team to hold a family meeting and lead a discussion. They can explain the goals of the medical care being offered. For example, are they to: Slow the cancer?  Lessen pain and other symptoms?  Prolong life?  Talking about these issues can help answer remaining questions. Having this talk with everyone present may lessen the conflicts and help the family reach a decision for your loved one. Children of all ages may wonder about dying, life after death, and what happens to the body. It's important to answer all their questions. If not, they may imagine things or make up their own stories. Let them know that everything is being done to keep their loved one comfortable. Tell them that you will keep them updated. (For much more detailed advice on talking to children and others about advanced cancer, see our Talking to Others about Advanced Cancer section.) Tell the truth. Children deserve to be told the truth about a poor prognosis. Hiding the truth from them leaves them unprepared for their loved one's death and can prolong the grief they will feel. And if you don't talk about your loved one's condition or don't tell the truth about it, your children may have a hard time trusting others in the future. By including children in the family crisis, you can guide them toward healthy ways of coping with what is happening. You can help them prepare for their impending loss in healing ways, such as providing opportunities for them to say goodbye. Know your own views. To answer tough questions from your kids about the potential death of your loved one, you need to know your own views on the subjects, including: What are you hoping for?  What do you think will happen?  You can show children how to hope for the best while accepting the likely outcome of death. If you're honest and up front, you're teaching them that death is a natural part of life. Your honesty shows them it’s okay to talk about death. You can also tell them that they won't be alone in their time of need. You will always be there for them. Counselors and oncology social workers can also suggest ways to talk to kids about death in ways they understand. They may know of local or national programs that offer help to children in these situations. Or they may suggest books, videos, and websites that explore these topics. If your children don't live with the person who has terminal cancer, it's helpful to prepare them before they visit. The decision of whether or not to let them visit is up to you, the person with cancer, and perhaps other family members. However, children should also have a choice about whether or not they want to visit. If your loved one is in a hospital or other facility, explain what the area and the room will look like. Tell them who might be there and what they might see. Also explain gently if their loved one’s physical condition or personality has changed. For a younger child, you might say something like this: "Grandma is very sick. When you see her, she will be in bed. She may not have a lot of energy to play with you or talk to you as much. She may look a little different too."  "Mom may be sleeping while you're there. Or she may be awake but won't talk because she's resting. But she'll know and be happy that you're there. She loves you!"  "Don't worry if you're visiting Uncle Bill and he says things that don't make sense. Sometimes the medicine he takes makes him do that. If it happens, we can tell his doctor about it to make sure he's okay."  Sometimes children don't want to visit, or can't for other reasons. In that case, there are other ways of showing they care. They can write a letter or do artwork. They can call the patient or leave messages or songs in their voicemail. Encourage them to show love and support in any way they choose.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Pre-Application Webinars for HTAN - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/news/htan-pre-application-webinars
txt: On November 9. 2023 from 2:00 - 4:00 pm ET, NCI  held back-to-back pre-application webinars on two recently published Notices of Funding Opportunities (NOFOs) for the Human Tumor Atlas Network (HTAN). The webinars provided an overview of the HTAN program and addressed frequently asked questions related to the NOFOs. RFA-CA-23-039: Human Tumor Atlas (HTA) Research Centers (U01 Clinical Trial Not Allowed)  RFA-CA-23-040: Pre-Cancer Atlas (PCA) Research Centers (U01 Clinical Trial Not Allowed)  Human Tumor Atlas (HTA) Research Centers Webinar: slides and recording  Pre-Cancer Atlas (PCA) Research Centers Webinar: slides and recording  NOT-CA-23-095: Notice of Pre-Application Webinar for RFA-CA-23-039 and RFA-CA-23-040 for the National Cancer Institute "Human Tumor Atlas Network (HTAN)" Program  FAQs related to the HTAN program and NOFOs can be found in this document. For additional information about HTAN funding opportunities, please contact Dr. Sharmistha Ghosh-Janjigian or Dr. Indu Kohaar.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Research Areas: Cancer and Public Health - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/public-health
txt: NCI scientists analyze data to explore how inherited genetic variation contributes to cancer susceptibility and outcomes.  The Importance of Cancer-Related Public Health Research  Selected NCI Activities in Cancer-Related Public Health Research  Recent Findings in Cancer-Related Public Health Research  The Importance of Cancer-Related Public Health Research Selected NCI Activities in Cancer-Related Public Health Research Recent Findings in Cancer-Related Public Health Research The Importance of Cancer-Related Public Health Research Cancer has a significant impact on public health in the United States. The years of life lost due to premature deaths, the economic burden to society, the burden to people due to lost wages and the costs associated with treatment, and the long-term effects of cancer and its treatment on the quality of life of survivors take a toll at a population level. Moreover, cancer’s impact on public health will continue to grow as the US population ages and some cancer incidence rates rise. Researchers are addressing this reality by studying cancer and its burden on a population-wide scale. This research includes: maintaining large registries of information about people diagnosed with cancer that can be used to identify important trends in cancer incidence, survival, and mortality; treatment characteristics; and patient outcomes  investigating behavioral patterns (such as tobacco use, diet, and screening practices); occupational, environmental, medical, and other exposures; and inherited genetic factors that can influence cancer risk  understanding and addressing factors that contribute to the unequal burden of cancer among certain populations, such as higher cancer death rates, less frequent use of proven screening tests, and higher rates of advanced cancer diagnoses  analyzing patterns of cancer care and outcomes in different health care settings  analyzing the economics of cancer and how the health care system affects access to care  studying ways to improve cancer control programs  assessing the risks and benefits associated with cancer screening to inform guidance on screening strategies  working on strategies to communicate and implement evidence-based practices for cancer prevention, detection, diagnosis, treatment, and survivorship into public health, clinical practice, and community settings  Although cancer affects individual patients and their families in different ways, studying its impact on large populations can provide important information that influences practices, policies, and programs that directly affect the health of millions of people in the United States each year. Selected NCI Activities in Cancer-Related Public Health Research Each year, NCI prepares a professional judgment budget to lead progress against cancer. NCI supports a diverse array of research that is helping to address issues in cancer-related public health. This research relies on extensive resources, often requires the participation of a large number of people, and can span many years. NCI plays an important role in public health research by conducting and funding large research studies and assembling large data collections that can be used by researchers worldwide. NCI also engages with other federal agencies and community members to identify, develop, and test culturally appropriate cancer prevention and intervention strategies with communities in mind. Findings from this work inform public health practices to help improve outcomes for all. Examples of NCI-supported activities in public health research include the following: The SEER Program collects data on cancer incidence and survival from cancer registries representing nearly half of the US population. Researchers worldwide use SEER data to identify important cancer-related trends, such as changes in the incidence of or mortality from specific cancers or cancer subtypes, as well as factors associated with prognosis and the risk of second primary cancers. SEER data are a critical source for studies that can spur important new research and inform decisions and policies on cancer control. Epidemiologic studies led or supported by NCI evaluate important factors that affect cancer risk. These factors include diet; tobacco and alcohol use; physical activity; genetics; workplace and environmental exposures, such as medical radiation and diesel exhaust; and infections, such as human papillomavirus (HPV), hepatitis B and C, and HIV. For example, the Connect for Cancer Prevention Study, is a partnership between NCI and nine health care systems across the Unites States to explore the causes of cancer and to learn how to better prevent it. NCI also conducts and supports research on the long-term effects of cancer and cancer treatment to identify strategies to prevent or lessen adverse effects in cancer survivors. NCI research findings have had a significant impact on public health by providing key evidence for determining whether specific exposures can cause or prevent cancer and for translating research findings into clinical practice guidelines and individual behavior recommendations. These findings come from studies that take years to conduct and require long-term “detective” work by NCI researchers and NCI grantees. NCI supports research on cancer care delivery that aligns with the National Cancer Plan’s goal to deliver optimal care. Read about the plan and this goal. Through NCI’s Healthcare Delivery Research Program and the NCI Community Oncology Research Program (NCORP), the institute also supports studies assessing patient, clinician, and organizational factors that influence the delivery of cancer care. These studies can provide important information that has the potential to improve cancer care. Similarly, the Cancer Intervention and Surveillance Modeling Network (CISNET) uses statistical modeling to understand the population-wide impact of cancer control interventions, including prevention, screening, and treatment. CISNET studies, for example, have been used by the US Preventive Services Task Force to inform their recommendations on screening guidelines for lung, breast, colorectal, prostate, and cervical cancers, as well as by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to inform coverage policies for related screening. Results from several large clinical trials led by NCI have also contributed to major changes in public health practice. For example, based on findings from the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST), the US Preventive Services Task Force recommended that people at high risk be offered a low-dose helical CT (LDCT) scan screening for lung cancer. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services now covers the cost of lung cancer screening with LDCT once a year for Medicare beneficiaries who meet the criteria. Behavioral research is also critical to public health. NCI supports numerous programs that study behavior and cancer from a wide variety of perspectives. For example, NCI funds research to understand the potential impact of e-cigarettes, vapes, and other electronic nicotine delivery systems on individual and population health. Other studies examine the factors that influence how population groups perceive their cancer risk and how it influences their behavior, such as decisions about cancer screening or whether parents have their children vaccinated against HPV. NCI supports a broad variety of research to understand and address the unequal burden of cancer. This work aligns with the National Cancer Plan’s goal to eliminate inequities. Read about the plan and this goal. Certain populations, including specific racial and ethnic groups, rural populations, sexual and gender minorities, and those in poverty, are affected disproportionately by some cancers. There are many reasons for these disparities, including societal factors and inadequate implementation of cancer prevention and treatment interventions in health care practice. NCI seeks to address cancer-related disparities by promoting and conducting health equity research that identifies the sources of disparities across the cancer control continuum and throughout the human life span. For example, there are NCI initiatives that support research on cancer control in rural settings and other geographically underserved areas, including research on health disparities in Native American populations. The number of people who have survived cancer is expected to grow to 26.1 million by 2040, further increasing the importance of understanding and developing interventions that address the unique physical, psychological, and economic issues that cancer survivors often face. NCI supports a robust research portfolio devoted to helping survivors of adult and pediatric cancers improve both their quality of life and their long-term survival. The institute funds research on adult survivor follow-up care, pediatric and young adult survivorship, survivors with advanced or metastatic disease, and survivorship needs related to primary care. Survivorship-focused studies examine topics such as ways to improve physical activity and diet among survivors, as well as help survivors manage psychological issues such as depression and anxiety. These studies also examine ways to manage physical side effects of cancer and its treatment, such as functional limitations, lymphedema, and sexual dysfunction. NCI also conducts and funds a number of studies to identify risk factors—related to treatment, behavior, and genetics—for the development of second primary cancers and other outcomes among cancer patients. This research can point to possible interventions for reducing that risk, such as suggesting ways to alter treatments without sacrificing efficacy and guiding the follow-up care of cancer survivors. One example of NCI-supported survivorship research is the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study (CCSS). This large cohort study examines the long-term adverse effects of cancer and cancer therapy on survivors of childhood cancer who were diagnosed between 1970 and 1999. The study was created to gain new knowledge about the long-term effects of cancer and its treatment and to educate survivors and the medical community about the potential impacts of a cancer diagnosis and treatment. Results from CCSS are used to help design treatment protocols and interventions that will improve survival, while minimizing harmful late effects. Recent Findings in Cancer-Related Public Health Research Opportunities for Achieving the Cancer Moonshot Goal of a 50% Reduction in Cancer Mortality by 2047  3–in–1 Approach Helps Women in Rural Areas Get Cancer Screenings  Financial Navigation Can Reduce the Financial Toxicity of Cancer Care  Study Probes Awareness of Alcohol’s Link to Cancer  Why Have Thyroid Cancer Diagnoses Spiked for US Women?  Breast Cancer Surgery Choice May Affect Young Survivors’ Quality of Life 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/infrastructure/cancer-centers/find/vanderbiltingram
txt: Ben Ho Park, M.D., Ph.D., Director Nashville,       Tennessee Main: (615) 936-8422 Visit Website Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center is a matrix center that integrates all of Vanderbilt’s cancer-related expertise and resources to alleviate cancer death and suffering through pioneering research; innovative patient-centered care; and evidence-based prevention, education, and community initiatives. Vanderbilt-Ingram was founded in 1993 and became an NCI-Designated Cancer Center in 1995 and a comprehensive cancer center in 2001. Vanderbilt-Ingram is an inclusive, collaborative, interdisciplinary cancer research community with more than 280 members dedicated to advancing discoveries in prevention, diagnosis, and treatment for both adult and pediatric cancers. The center is recognized for its strength in discovery, translation, and collaborative “team” science in areas of lung, breast, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary cancers, as well as robust world-leading cancer epidemiology with unique population laboratories for cancer discovery. Vanderbilt-Ingram investigators have made discoveries in genomics, drug development, precision oncology, cancer epidemiology, health outcomes and control, early detection, prevention, and cancer disparities research that have shifted paradigms and changed practice and guidelines. Vanderbilt-Ingram has focused efforts on growth and excellence in basic science and drug discovery, precision oncology and cancer immunotherapy, epidemiology, and dissemination of education and interventions. Driving these efforts are the center’s eight cancer-focused research programs, which span the spectrum of scientific endeavors—from basic science to clinical and population-based research—and include breast cancer, cancer epidemiology, cancer health outcomes and control, genome maintenance, gastrointestinal cancer, host‒tumor interactions, signal transduction and chemical biology, and translational research and interventional oncology. Leveraging the unique assets of its investigators, Vanderbilt-Ingram supports: advancing fundamental discoveries by leading basic science research  moving discoveries to interventions to prevent, detect early, treat, and control/cure cancers  enabling a systems approach to cancer by identifying individuals and populations at high risk of cancer and developing interventions to lower this risk, and by identifying factors that account for individual difference in cancers and treatment response and resistance  reducing cancer disparities and their burden by leveraging opportunities in data science and machine learning to open new frontiers in cancer research and increase access to interventions  developing, diversifying, and sustaining a workforce capable of affecting difficult-to-treat cancers, by implementing education, behavioral, and prevention strategies, and advancing research in cancer health policy and health literacy  Vanderbilt-Ingram’s goal is to implement research initiatives with the most significant potential to impact cancer prevention, detection, diagnosis, and treatment by leveraging the center’s strong culture of transdisciplinary collaboration. This culture is exemplified by several NCI-funded grants, including two NCI Specialized Programs of Research Excellence in breast cancer and gastrointestinal cancer; a long-standing partnership with Meharry Medical College and Tennessee State University to reduce cancer health disparities; the Southern Community Cohort Study, one of the largest and most intensive collaborative studies ever launched to evaluate the determinants of cancer among African Americans and low-income adults regardless of race; and the Cancer Systems Biology Consortium focused on small cell lung cancer. Vanderbilt-Ingram’s recent successes include: Developing best practices to assess immunotherapy toxicity and implement strategies for prevention and treatment through the Vanderbilt Program for Optimizing Immuno-oncology Therapy (V-POINT). Vanderbilt-Ingram investigators in the Translational Research and Interventional Oncology and Breast Cancer Research Programs were the first to identify and describe immune checkpoint inhibitor-associated myocarditis, a new cardiovascular syndrome triggered by immunotherapy. Through their continued efforts and collaborations with colleagues from other institutions and the Food and Drug Administration, Vanderbilt-Ingram is developing best practices to assess immunotherapy toxicity and implement strategies to prevent and treat it.  Playing leadership roles in the national All of Us Research Program and the Vanderbilt electronic health record-based biobank, BioVU. From these large-scale epidemiologic studies and other large population-based cohorts, Vanderbilt-Ingram investigators are investigating patient-reported outcomes, disparities, quality of care, and cost-effectiveness, resulting in guideline-shifting research relevant to the cancers with the highest mortality rates and for which disparities exist in the communities served by the center.  Using data from the NCI-funded Southern Community Cohort Study, a prospective cohort study of more than 85,000 adults in the southeastern United States with the highest representation of African Americans (two-thirds) among existing US cohorts, Vanderbilt-Ingram investigators led a study evaluating US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) guidelines that determine which smokers qualify for CT screening of the lungs. They determined that these current guidelines excluded significant numbers of African Americans who develop lung cancer. As a result, the USPSTF recently issued a draft recommendation statement to extend eligibility criteria based on these findings.  Vanderbilt-Ingram investigators in the Breast Cancer Research Program subtyped triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) identifying unique ontology and differential response to standard chemotherapy. These studies help inform clinical trials investigating whether selection of chemotherapies and immunotherapies can be directed by the knowledge of molecular TNBC subtypes. Further, Breast Cancer Research Program members showed that basal-like TNBCs have a poor prognosis and are more likely to be susceptible to DNA damaging agents such as cisplatin. These data led to a large phase 3 cooperative group trial led by Vanderbilt-Ingram investigators exploring the role of platinum agents in patients with basal-like TNBC and residual disease following conventional chemotherapy.   * This profile was provided by the Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Anatomy of a Cancer Treatment Scam - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/managing-care/using-trusted-resources/health-info-online
txt: Anatomy of a Cancer Treatment Scam The Federal Trade Commission developed this video to help people maintain a healthy level of skepticism when they are searching for information about cancer, so that they don’t become victims of fraud.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Study suggests health benefits from black tea - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2022/health-benefits-black-tea
txt:  Posted:
August 29, 2022  240-760-6600 Black tea can be part of a healthy diet. A prospective study of half a million tea drinkers in the United Kingdom has shown that higher tea intake was associated with a modestly lower risk of death. The study, led by researchers at NCI, part of the National Institutes of Health, is a large and comprehensive analysis of the potential mortality benefits of drinking black tea, which is the most common type of tea consumed in the U.K. Past studies finding a modest association between higher tea intake and lower risk of death have mainly focused on Asian populations, who commonly drink green tea. Studies on black tea have yielded mixed results. In the new study, the researchers found that people who consumed two or more cups of tea per day had a 9% to 13% lower risk of death from any cause than people who did not drink tea. Higher tea consumption was also associated with a lower risk of death from cardiovascular disease, ischemic heart disease, and stroke. The association was seen regardless of preferred tea temperature, the addition of milk or sugar, and genetic variations affecting the rate at which people metabolize caffeine. The findings, which appear Aug. 30, 2022, in Annals of Internal Medicine, suggest that black tea, even at higher levels of intake, can be part of a healthy diet, the researchers wrote. The study involved 498,043 men and women between ages 40 and 69 who participated in a large cohort study called UK Biobank. The participants were followed for about 11 years, and death information came from a linked database from the UK National Health Service. Maki Inoue-Choi, Ph.D., Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, NCI “Tea Consumption and All-Cause and Cause-Specific Mortality in the UK Biobank: A Prospective Cohort Study” appears Aug. 30 in Annals of Internal Medicine. About the National Cancer Institute (NCI): NCI leads the National Cancer Program and NIH’s efforts to dramatically reduce the prevalence of cancer and improve the lives of people with cancer. NCI supports a wide range of cancer research and training extramurally through grants and contracts. NCI’s intramural research program conducts innovative, transdisciplinary basic, translational, clinical, and epidemiological research on the causes of cancer, avenues for prevention, risk prediction, early detection, and treatment, including research at the NIH Clinical Center—the world’s largest research hospital. Learn more about NCI’s intramural research from the Center for Cancer Research and the Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics. For more information about cancer, please visit the NCI website at cancer.gov or call NCI’s contact center at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit nih.gov.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: JEB - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/jeb
txt: This chemotherapy combination contains the drugs carboplatin (JM8),  etoposide phosphate, and bleomycin. Combinations usually work better than single drugs because 
         different drugs kill 
         cancer 
         cells in different ways. Each of the drugs in this combination is approved by the 
         Food and Drug 
         Administration (FDA) 
         to treat cancer or conditions related to cancer. JEB 
         is used in children to treat the following malignant extracranial germ cell tumors:  Ovarian germ cell tumors.  Testicular germ cell tumors. This combination may also be used with other drugs or 
         treatments or to treat other types of cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Epithelioid Hemangioendothelioma - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/pediatric-adult-rare-tumor/rare-tumors/rare-vascular-tumors/epithelioid-hemangioendothelioma
txt: You can help speed up the development of new treatments by giving researchers the tools they need. Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma, or EHE, is a rare cancer that grows from the cells that make up the blood vessels. This cancer can occur anywhere in the body with the most common sites being the liver, lungs, and bone. It usually happens in people between 30 and 50 years of age but can also occur in young children and older people. EHE is very rare, with only one in every one million people diagnosed with this cancer worldwide. Because EHE can be hard to diagnose, the actual number of people with EHE may be higher. People with EHE will have different symptoms depending on where the tumor is located. Common symptoms include:
•    Discomfort or pain in the abdomen
•    Nausea
•    Cough or trouble breathing
•    Fever
•    Pain and swelling around the tumor area
•    Weight loss
•    Problems moving or walking
•    Skin lumps and bumps that may appear red or blue
•    Broken bones
•    Coughing up blood Imaging: If you have symptoms of EHE, your doctor will take images of the tumor using MRI, CT, X-ray, or PET scan to look at the size of the tumor and where it is in the body. They will also check for signs that the tumor has spread to other parts of the body. Biopsy: To check if the tumor is EHE, your doctor will perform a biopsy, taking a small sample from the tumor with a needle. An expert, called a pathologist, will study cells from the sample under the microscope to see what kind of tumor it is. Since EHE is so rare, there is no standard treatment. Treatment for each person is different and depends on where in the body EHE starts and if it has spread. You should see a doctor who is an expert in tumors that form in blood vessels to decide the best approach for your cancer. You can contact MyPART for help finding experts near you. Watch and wait: In some cases, the tumor grows very slowly, or even shrinks without any treatment. In this case it may be safest for your doctor to check your tumor often without treating it. Surgery: Surgery is most often used to treat EHE that has not spread to other parts of the body. Surgery can also be used with chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Radiation therapy: Doctors sometimes use radiation therapy to treat EHE, with or without surgery. Radiation therapy is most often used to treat EHE that grows in the bones. Because radiation therapy can cause other cancers in the future, it is important to discuss this option with your doctor. Chemotherapy: Doctors may use chemotherapy with other treatments. It is important to discuss the side effects with your doctor. Targeted therapy: Because EHE is made up of cells that form blood vessels, some doctors are trying treatments that target tumor blood vessels. These treatments are called anti-angiogenics. Immunotherapy: Immunotherapy uses different treatments to help the body’s immune system kill tumor cells. Embolization: In some cases, blocking the blood flow to the tumor, called embolization, can help shrink and kill the tumor. No, EHE is not passed down in families. We think that in EHE, chromosomes (the structures in your cells that contain all of your genes) break apart and get put back together in the wrong way. This can cause cells to not function like they should. In most EHEs, the WWTR gene that makes the TAZ protein joins with the CAMTA1 gene. In a small number of EHEs, the YAP gene joins with the TFE3 gene. TAZ and YAP work together to drive growth and scientists are looking at ways to block them. Doctors may look for these changes in chromosomes to confirm that the cancer is EHE. The estimate of how a disease will affect you long-term is called prognosis. Every person is different and prognosis will depend on many factors, such as: Where the tumor is in your body  If the cancer has spread to other parts of your body  How much of the tumor was taken out during surgery  If you want information on your prognosis, it is important to talk to your doctor. NCI also has resources to help you understand cancer prognosis.
Doctors estimate survival rates by how groups of people with EHE have done in the past. Given that there are so few EHE patients, survival rates may not be very accurate and may not consider newer treatments being developed. The course of the disease for people with EHE can be hard to predict. Some people live a long time, even without treatment. In other cases, the cancer grows quickly and spreads, even with treatment. EHE that has spread to other parts of the body does not always lead to a poor prognosis. Some of this depends on where the EHE is located, so it is very important to discuss your case with you doctor to understand your prognosis.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Serological Sciences Centers of Excellence - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/key-initiatives/covid-19/serological-sciences-network/u54-centers-of-excellence
txt: As part of the NCI Serological Sciences Network (SeroNet), NCI has awarded eight institutions U54 grants to conduct multiple research projects to characterize the immune responses to coronavirus infection and learn about what drives immune response, disease progression, and protection against future infection.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Trabectedin - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/trabectedin
txt: This page contains brief information about trabectedin
         and a collection of links to more information about the use of 
         this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Trabectedin
         is approved to treat:  Liposarcoma and leiomyosarcoma (types of soft tissue sarcoma) that cannot be removed by surgery or have metastasized (spread to other parts of the body). It is used in patients who have already been treated with anthracycline chemotherapy.  Trabectedin
         is also being studied in the treatment of other types of
         cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Trabectedin - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Find Clinical Trials for Trabectedin - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Partnerships - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/rare-brain-spine-tumor/refer-participate/partnerships
txt: 2019 World Summit of Brain Tumor Patient Advocates NCI-CONNECT partners with non-profit organizations who share a common concern for improving the outcomes of adults with rare central nervous system (CNS) tumors through awareness and education. Partners are non-profit groups that work with NCI-CONNECT to identify and engage adults with select rare CNS tumors by disseminating information about clinical trials and new approaches to improve care and treatment. All primary CNS cancers are rare. They account for less than two percent of all cancers diagnosed each year in the United States. NCI-CONNECT focuses on select tumor types, each with less than 2,000 people diagnosed per year in the United States. The low incidence rates of these CNS cancers mean patients and researchers face unique challenges. Patients struggle to find expert care and treatments. At the same time, the cancer research community struggles to identify enough patients to conduct meaningful research. NCI-CONNECT seeks to address these challenges and unmet needs by connecting patients, providers, and advocates in a collaborative network with a harmonized mission. This means developing partnerships with non-profits that advocate for people living with brain and spine tumors through education and awareness. Together, we can have a great impact on the progress of clinical care and research. Use these resources to find support and connect with others affected by rare central nervous system tumors. As part of the Rare Tumor Patient Engagement Network, NCI-CONNECT has developed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) that outlines a framework of reciprocal cooperation. The MOU helps NCI-CONNECT and partner organizations reach their goals of improving the outcomes of patients with select rare tumors—as well as identifying and engaging those patients through information dissemination and education. A partner organization will: Certify that it is a non-profit organization  Have goals that relate to education, awareness, or support for patients with rare CNS tumors  Use its own capabilities, networks, and resources to disseminate information provided by NCI-CONNECT  Link to NCI-CONNECT information from its website, newsletter, and social media accounts  Share NCI-CONNECT clinical trials, publications, and educational information with its community  Effectively communicate with NCI-CONNECT  Be a collaborative and collegial member of the NCI-CONNECT partnership network  NCI-CONNECT will: Provide all necessary information, tools, and resources  Provide access to its research and clinical experts  Invite partners to its educational workshops  Provide partners an NCI-CONNECT membership badge  Effectively communicate with partners  Be a collaborative and collegial partner  The first step to becoming an NCI-CONNECT partner is downloading our partner application. Send your completed application to NCICONNECT@mail.nih.gov. Non-profit patient advocacy organizations help to educate and support individuals with a brain or spine tumor diagnosis. NCI-CONNECT is proud to partner with the following non-profit brain and spine tumor organizations, which are committed to raising awareness and educating patients with rare CNS tumors. American Brain Tumor Association (ABTA)  Brains for the Cure (BFTC)  Brain Tumor Network (BTN)  Collaborative Ependymoma Research Network (CERN) Foundation  The EndBrainCancer Initiative (EBCI)  Glioma-Center Foundation (GCF)  International Brain Tumour Alliance (IBTA)  National Brain Tumor Society (NBTS)  Oligo Nation  Contact us at NCICONNECT@mail.nih.gov or 240-760-6530.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: CCCT - CTRP - Registration, Amendments, Updates - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/ccct/ctrp/registration
txt: Interventional trials should be registered in CTRP prior to enrollment of the first patient. Trials can be registered prior to activation, so that the registration record can be made available for ClinicalTrials.gov registration. Observational studies should be registered sufficiently in advance, so that they can appear on the CTRP-generated Data Table 4 for observational studies in support of the Cancer Center Support Grant application. All Interventional trials directly and indirectly funded by NCI which open to accrual as of or after 1/1/2009 and observational studies open to accrual as of or after 1/1/2020, including all taking place in NCI-Designated Cancer Centers, need to be registered in CTRP. This also includes both industrial trials and non-cancer trials. CTRP supports, but does not currently require, reporting of Expanded Access/Compassionate Use studies. Ancillary-Correlative and single patient studies are not in scope for CTRP registration and reporting. All interventional trials and observational studies must be registered in CTRP to appear on a CTRP-generated Data Table 4.  NCI-Designated Cancer Centers can request exclusion of expanded access/compassionate use trials and trials that are not cancer-focused from their CTRP-generated Data Table 4.  All NCI-Designated Cancer Centers and other NCI awardees are expected to register any trial that is either directly or indirectly funded by NCI. Exception: The following trials do not need to be registered in CTRP, as this information will be transferred to CTRP within NCI: Trials that are reviewed and monitored by NCI CTEP PIO and NCI DCP PIO. This applies to all NCTN, NCORP, and ETCTN trials.  Trials that take place in NCI Center for Cancer Research (CCR).  There are 3 ways to register trials with CTRP: Online via the CTRP Registration Site  Trial owners enter a limited number of data elements into the CTRP website and upload documents required for registration, in a machine-readable for only, e.g., Microsoft Word, Adobe PDF, including: Clinical trial protocol  IRB approval form  Informed consent form (if not part of the protocol document) – optional for observational studies  A list of participating sites (if not part of the protocol document)  Note: Submit a full protocol document and consent form. Incomplete documents, e.g., protocol summaries will not be accepted.  Documents required for registration that are not machine readable will not be accepted.  Following submission, the NCI Clinical Trials Reporting Office (CTRO) abstracts the protocol, capturing key data elements (e.g., eligibility criteria, trial design, outcome measures). Importing the registration record into CTRP from ClincalTrials.gov 
	Participating sites use the NCT ID to retrieve the ClinicalTrials.gov record and import this record into CTRP for registration. This can be used only for the following trials:
	Industrial Trials and Trials Whose Lead Organization is not an NCI-awardee
Expanded Access Trials  Using Web Services
	NCI will work with individual cancer centers wishing to adapt their CDMS to use the CTRP registration service. If you are interested in using this approach, please contact us at ncictro@mail.nih.gov.  Industrial Trials and Trials Whose Lead Organization is not an NCI-awardee  Expanded Access Trials  Amendments to a clinical trial protocol must be submitted to CTRP within 20 days of the approval by the Institutional Review Board (IRB). Amendments include changes that substantively alter one or more of the following: Treatment administration  Study design including target enrollment  Principal Investigator  Amendments are to include all changes and updates since the most recent protocol submission. Overall trial and participating site status changes (e.g., a change from "Active" to "Temporarily Closed to Accrual") should be submitted no later than 30 days after the status change took place. Updates to basic trial data should be reported to CTRP at least annually. Updates are defined as other changes to the protocol that do not substantively affect the scientific conduct of the study, the study design, and/or the sites in which patients are being enrolled on the trial. Note: If the Interventional trial or Observational study is multi-institutional, then the lead organization should submit amendments, updates and changes in participating sites as frequently as needed to assure the accuracy of the use of the record by participating sites. Trials must be reviewed for accuracy at least twice each year. Automated email reminders will be sent to trial owners, trial submitters, and site administrators one month prior to the Trial Record Verification due date and monthly thereafter until the trial(s) have been verified. NCI awardees that are sponsors as defined by the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007, P.L. 110-85 (FDAAA) are responsible for submitting data to ClinicalTrials.gov in compliance with FDAAA. NCI cannot submit data to ClinicalTrials.gov on behalf of NCI awardees for non-NCI sponsored trials. NCI worked with National Library of Medicine (NLM) ClinicalTrials.gov to implement the “Upload from NCI CTRP” function in ClinicalTrials.gov. (PRS User's Guide, Section 9.1, NCI CTRP UPLOAD). This feature enables clinical trial sponsors, as defined by 21 CFR 50.3, to use CTRP data to register and update their clinical trial records in their organization’s ClinicalTrials.gov account. Advantages of using “Upload from NCI CTRP” feature include reuse of the information abstracted in CTRP as well as consistent formatting of persons and organizations.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Micah - Childhood Cancer Survivor - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/childhood/childhood-cancer-data-initiative/stories/micah
txt: Micah is a middle schooler and cancer survivor who hopes that their data will go on to help others. Childhood Cancer Survivor Micah (they/them) is in 6th grade this year. Like many kids their age, they love being with friends and pursuing their hobbies—like reading, writing, being on the swim team, and learning to play the clarinet. Getting here was difficult though, as roughly a decade ago, at 15 months old, Micah was diagnosed with neuroblastoma. This began months of treatment and care, including enrollment in a clinical trial and immunotherapy. Micah also endured additional surgeries, chemotherapy, and radiation, relapsing twice. But as of August 2014, they have no evidence of disease. Now Micah’s family hopes that information from Micah’s experiences goes on to help others with childhood cancer. “If there is anything that comes from Micah’s story, any data from their treatment and care, anything to make the process easier or more effective for future patients,” said Micah’s parents, Kate and Jeff, “that would be the ideal outcome.”
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Talimogene Laherparepvec - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/talimogenelaherparepvec
txt: This page contains brief information about talimogene laherparepvec
         and a collection of links to more information about the use of 
         this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Talimogene laherparepvec
         is approved to treat:  Melanoma in the skin and lymph nodes that cannot be removed by surgery. It is used as local treatment in patients whose disease has come back after being treated with surgery.  Talimogene laherparepvec
         is also being studied in the treatment of other types of
         cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Talimogene Laherparepvec - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Oncolytic Virus Enables the Immune System to Attack Tumors Cancer Treatment Vaccines Find Clinical Trials for Talimogene Laherparepvec - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Diarrhea and Cancer Treatment - Side Effects - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/diarrhea
txt: Drink plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration. It may also help to avoid certain foods, such as dairy products. Talk with your doctor to learn what medicine to take.  What is diarrhea?  What causes diarrhea?  What are the dangers of diarrhea?  Ways to manage diarrhea  Questions to ask your health care team about diarrhea  What is diarrhea? What causes diarrhea? What are the dangers of diarrhea? Ways to manage diarrhea Questions to ask your health care team about diarrhea What is diarrhea? Diarrhea means having bowel movements that are soft, loose, or watery more often than normal. If diarrhea is severe or lasts a long time, the body does not absorb enough water and nutrients. This can cause you to become dehydrated or malnourished. Narrator:
What to do when you have diarrhea from radiation therapy. Let's listen in as support group members and the group's leader, Janet, talk about coping with diarrhea. Miguel:
I don't know about the rest of you, but I'm beginning to feel like I live in the bathroom. Some days diarrhea keeps me close to home when I'd rather be out. Janet:
I'm glad you brought this topic up, Miguel. Many people getting radiation therapy to the pelvis, stomach, or abdomen have diarrhea. The good news is that there are things you can do to manage it. Let's go over 3 steps that can help. Miguel:
Thanks. That would be great. Janet:
First, drink lots of clear liquids like water, ginger ale and clear broth. Most people need to drink more liquids when they have diarrhea – 8 to 12 glasses a day. Check with your doctor to see how much liquid you should drink. Keep in mind that this won't stop the diarrhea, but it will help replace the fluids you are losing. Second, eat small meals every 2 or 3 hours that are easy on the stomach. Anyone ever heard of the BRAT diet? Gina:
Yeah. Let's see… "B" is for bananas, then there's "R" for rice, "A" for applesauce, and… oh, then there's "T" for toast. Janet:
That's it - bananas, rice, applesauce, and toast. OK, on to the third step – avoid things that can make your diarrhea worse, like milk, alcohol, and drinks with caffeine in them. Stay away from raw fruits and vegetables that have a lot of fiber in them and stay away from fried or greasy foods. Ask your doctor about other foods you may need to avoid. Gina:
Is there medicine that can help? Janet:
Yes, medicine can help some people. Ask your doctor or nurse about medicine that would be best for you. Folks, one last thing – be sure to call your doctor or nurse right away if you're dizzy or have diarrhea or stomach pain for more than a day. Okay? Gina:
Okay. Thanks for the information, Janet – I think I can do those things you mentioned. Narrator Summary:
Drink lots of clear liquids each day. Most people need to drink 8 to 12 glasses. Check with your doctor to see how much liquid you should drink each day. It may also help to follow the BRAT diet. Bananas, rice, applesauce, and toast are easy on the stomach. Avoid greasy or spicy foods. They can make your diarrhea worse, so can milk, alcohol, and drinks with caffeine in them. Ask about medicine that can help, and be sure to let your doctor or nurse know if you're dizzy or have diarrhea or stomach pain for more than a day. Talk with your nurse to learn more about how to manage diarrhea during radiation therapy. What causes diarrhea? Cancer treatments, or the cancer itself, may cause diarrhea or make it worse. Some medicines, infections, and stress can also cause diarrhea. Tell your health care team if you have diarrhea. What are the dangers of diarrhea? Diarrhea that leads to dehydration (the loss of too much fluid from the body) and low levels of salt and potassium (important minerals needed by the body) can be life threatening. Call your health care team if you feel dizzy or lightheaded, have dark yellow urine or are not urinating, or have a fever of 100.5 °F (38 °C) or higher. Ways to manage diarrhea You may be advised to take steps to prevent complications from diarrhea: Learn about treatment side effects that may affect eating and what to do about them. Drink plenty of fluid each day. Most people need to drink 8 to 12 cups of fluid each day. Ask your doctor or nurse how much fluid you should drink each day. For severe diarrhea, only clear liquids or IV (intravenous) fluids may be advised for a short period.  Eat small meals that are easy on your stomach. Eat six to eight small meals throughout the day, instead of three large meals. Foods high in potassium and sodium (minerals you lose when you have diarrhea) are good food choices, for most people. Limit or avoid foods and drinks that can make your diarrhea worse.  Check before taking medicine. Check with your doctor or nurse before taking medicine for diarrhea. Your doctor will prescribe the correct medicine for you.  Keep your anal area clean and dry. Try using warm water and wipes to stay clean. It may help to take warm, shallow baths. These are called sitz baths.  Questions to ask your health care team about diarrhea Prepare for your visit by making a list of questions to ask. Consider adding these questions to your list: What is causing the diarrhea?  What symptoms should I call you about?  How much liquid should I drink each day?  Can I speak to a registered dietitian to learn more about foods and drinks that are best for me?  What medicine or other steps can I take to prevent diarrhea and to decrease rectal pain?  NCI's Gastrointestinal Complications PDQ® summary discusses GI problems common in cancer patients. For more information, see the section on diarrhea in the patient or health professional version. Listen to tips on how to manage diarrhea caused by your cancer treatments such as radiation therapy.
(Type: MP3 | Time: 2:55 | Size: 2.7MB)View Transcript Narrator:
What to do when you have diarrhea from radiation therapy. Let's listen in as support group members and the group's leader, Janet, talk about coping with diarrhea. Miguel:
I don't know about the rest of you, but I'm beginning to feel like I live in the bathroom. Some days diarrhea keeps me close to home when I'd rather be out. Janet:
I'm glad you brought this topic up, Miguel. Many people getting radiation therapy to the pelvis, stomach, or abdomen have diarrhea. The good news is that there are things you can do to manage it. Let's go over 3 steps that can help. Miguel:
Thanks. That would be great. Janet:
First, drink lots of clear liquids like water, ginger ale and clear broth. Most people need to drink more liquids when they have diarrhea – 8 to 12 glasses a day. Check with your doctor to see how much liquid you should drink. Keep in mind that this won't stop the diarrhea, but it will help replace the fluids you are losing. Second, eat small meals every 2 or 3 hours that are easy on the stomach. Anyone ever heard of the BRAT diet? Gina:
Yeah. Let's see… "B" is for bananas, then there's "R" for rice, "A" for applesauce, and… oh, then there's "T" for toast. Janet:
That's it - bananas, rice, applesauce, and toast. OK, on to the third step – avoid things that can make your diarrhea worse, like milk, alcohol, and drinks with caffeine in them. Stay away from raw fruits and vegetables that have a lot of fiber in them and stay away from fried or greasy foods. Ask your doctor about other foods you may need to avoid. Gina:
Is there medicine that can help? Janet:
Yes, medicine can help some people. Ask your doctor or nurse about medicine that would be best for you. Folks, one last thing – be sure to call your doctor or nurse right away if you're dizzy or have diarrhea or stomach pain for more than a day. Okay? Gina:
Okay. Thanks for the information, Janet – I think I can do those things you mentioned. Narrator Summary:
Drink lots of clear liquids each day. Most people need to drink 8 to 12 glasses. Check with your doctor to see how much liquid you should drink each day. It may also help to follow the BRAT diet. Bananas, rice, applesauce, and toast are easy on the stomach. Avoid greasy or spicy foods. They can make your diarrhea worse, so can milk, alcohol, and drinks with caffeine in them. Ask about medicine that can help, and be sure to let your doctor or nurse know if you're dizzy or have diarrhea or stomach pain for more than a day. Talk with your nurse to learn more about how to manage diarrhea during radiation therapy.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Ropeginterferon Alfa-2b-njft - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/ropeginterferon-alfa-2b-njft
txt: This page contains brief information about ropeginterferon alfa-2b-njft
         and a collection of links to more information about the use of 
         this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Ropeginterferon alfa-2b-njft
         is approved to treat:  Polycythemia vera in adults.  Ropeginterferon alfa-2b-njft
         is also being studied in the treatment of other types of
         cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Ropeginterferon Alfa-2b-njft - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Immune System Modulators Find Clinical Trials for Ropeginterferon Alfa-2b - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NCI statement on clinical trials during COVID-19 pandemic - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2020/nci-statement-clinical-trials-during-covid-19
txt:  Posted:
March 19, 2020  240-760-6600 The institute is monitoring NCI-supported clinical trials to address the needs of investigators and to maintain continuity of care for patients during the COVID-19 public health emergency. Cancer patients are particularly vulnerable to infectious diseases such as COVID-19, both because of their underlying health condition and because cancer treatments can suppress the immune system. At this time, we do not know how the COVID-19 pandemic will evolve or the extent to which it will place stress on cancer patients, their families, and their caregivers. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other public health experts have provided authoritative advice on how individuals can protect themselves. Patients should seek advice from their health care providers regarding their individual care and whether they should be tested for COVID-19. A patient's health care team is best suited to evaluate that individual's unique situation and advise on the safest course of action. As more information becomes available on mitigation strategies from physicians caring directly for cancer patients, that information will be shared broadly in the oncology community. For example, researchers at the Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, and the University of Washington have published information about managing cancer care during the COVID-19 pandemic, and NCI is closely monitoring the clinical experience of cancer caregivers across the world. For individuals undergoing treatment for cancer, the spectrum of acute need for cancer treatment is broad. In some situations, it is essential that patients receive treatment immediately for their cancer. In other situations, such as for patients who are not receiving active treatment, visits for follow-up cancer care may be safely delayed. Patients should discuss individual treatment plans with their health care team. During the challenging situation of the COVID-19 pandemic, we understand that health care system resources will be limited, and this may affect cancer clinical trial operations. We do, however, believe that there are circumstances (e.g., in order to access potentially life-saving therapy) where patients with cancer should enroll or continue to participate in a clinical trial. Advice given to patients participating in clinical trials should be tailored to the individual patient based on their clinical circumstances. On March 18, the Food and Drug Administration issued guidance on the conduct of clinical trials of medical products during the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, NCI has provided guidance for clinical trials’ activities during the COVID-19 pandemic, with the intent of giving greater flexibility to the patient and their caregiver so that they may more easily be treated on a clinical trial if indicated. We continue to closely monitor NCI-supported clinical trials to help address the needs of investigators to implement accommodations so that they can, to the greatest extent possible, maintain continuity of care for their patients who are being treated on trials. If a clinical trials site's policies and practices vary from the guidance we have outlined, they are encouraged to contact NCI’s Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: CCDRSC Roster - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/ccct/steering-committees/ncorp/cancer-care/roster
txt: The Cancer Care Delivery Research Steering Committee (CCDRSC) reviews and prioritize cancer care delivery research concepts to be conducted through the NCI Community Oncology Research Program (NCORP) Research Base mechanism. Committee activities help foster collaboration between groups and institutions engaged in conducting trials. The CCDRSC's membership comprises representatives from the NCORP Research Bases, R01 investigators, community oncologists, biostatisticians, patient advocates, and NCI Staff.  Supriya G. Mohile, M.D., M.S.
University of Rochester Medical Center
Rochester, NY Kathryn E. Weaver, Ph.D.
Wake Forest University School of Medicine
Winston-Salem, NC  Ruth C. Carlos, M.D.
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI Kathleen Castro, M.S., RN, AOCN
National Cancer Institute
Rockville, MD Ronald C. Chen, M.D., M.P.H.
University of Kansas Medical Center
Kansas City, KS Mary E. Cooley, Ph.D., RN, FAAN
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Boston, MA Janet S. de Moor, Ph.D., M.P.H.
National Cancer Institute
Rockville, MD Stacie Dusetzina, Ph.D.
Vanderbilt University Medical Center
Nashville, TN Patricia Ganz, M.D.
University of California Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA Ann M. Geiger, Ph.D., M.P.H.
National Cancer Institute
Rockville, MD Judith Hopkins, M.D.
Piedmont Hematology Oncology Associates
Kernersville, NC Charles Kamen, Ph.D., M.P.H.
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY Anne E. Kazak, Ph.D., ABPP
Nemours Center for Healthcare Delivery Science
Wilmington, DE Heidi D. Klepin, M.D., M.S.
Wake Forest University School of Medicine
Winston-Salem, NC Josh Mailman, M.B.A.
Patient Advocate
Oakland, CA Heather B. Neuman, M.D., M.S., FACS
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI Chandylen Nightingale, Ph.D., M.P.H.
Wake Forest University School of Medicine
Winston-Salem, NC Nitin Ohri, M.D., M.S.
Albert Einstein College of Medicine Montefiore Medical Center
Bronx, NY Elyse R. Park, Ph.D.
Massachusetts General Hospital
Boston, MA Susan K. Parsons, M.D., M.R.P.
Tufts University Medical Center
Boston, MA Laurel J. Pracht
Patient Advocate
Sun City, AZ Stephanie Pugh, Ph.D.
American College of Radiology
Philadelphia, PA Scott Ramsey, M.D., Ph.D.
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center 
Seattle, WA Veena Shankaran, M.D., M.S.
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center 
Seattle, WA Anna Snavely, Ph.D.
Wake Forest University School of Medicine
Winston-Salem, NC Andrew Sussman, Ph.D., M.C.R.P.
University of New Mexico Comprehensive Cancer Center
Albuquerque, NM William A. Wilson, M.D.
Adena Health System
Chillicothe, OH Ramy Serour, M.S.ramy.serour@nih.gov 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Moving from Hepatitis Discovery to Elimination - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/news/hepatitis-elimination
txt: NIH is committed to advancing progress toward viral hepatitis elimination. NIH funded research is focusing on understanding the molecular processes of viral hepatitis infection and the development of new vaccines, diagnostics, and treatment strategies to prevent hepatitis infection and related disease.  Additionally, the NIH released The Strategic Plan for Trans-NIH Research to Cure Hepatitis B for Development of Improved HBV Therapies in 2019  and supports the Viral Hepatitis National Strategic Plan for the United States: A Roadmap to Elimination 2021-2025. DCB contributes to these NIH efforts by funding basic research to improve the understanding of the role of viral hepatitis in the development of cancer. To facilitate discussions around research and implementation strategies to advance the goal of hepatitis elimination, NIH staff (including Program Directors in DCB) and the Coalition for Global Hepatitis Elimination launched a webinar series, "Moving from Hepatitis Discovery to Elimination: NIH Research Advancing Hepatitis Elimination." The presentations aim to highlight ongoing research that can benefit elimination efforts, support translation of research into implementation, and identify additional research needs.  Past Webinars  Collaborating NIH Institutes and Organizations for the Webinar Series  Past Webinars Collaborating NIH Institutes and Organizations for the Webinar Series Past Webinars September 14, 2023 (10:00 - 2:30 pm ET)Virtual Symposium: Controlled Human Infection Model (CHIM) for Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) Vaccine Development June 15, 2023 (11:00 - 12:30 pm ET)Leaving No One Behind: Interventions that Address Systems and Structures to Reduce Hepatitis C Virus Disparities May 4, 2023 (11:00 - 1:00 pm ET)Hepatitis C Elimination at the Intersection of People Who Inject Drugs in Rural Settings January 26, 2023 (12:00 - 2:00 pm ET)Research of Hepatitis B Virus and Related Disease in the United States: Key Findings from the NIDDK Hepatitis B Research Network September 29, 2022 (12:00 - 2:00 pm ET)Improving Access to HCC Care Globally & the Importance of HIV Co-Infection: Research Advancing the Field June 16, 2022 (3:00 - 4:30 pm ET)Leaving No One Behind: Culture and Context Count in Tailoring Hepatitis Interventions May 5, 2022 (3:00 - 4:30 pm ET)Hepatitis C Elimination at the Intersection of People Who Use Drugs and the Criminal Justice System March 24-24, 2022 (12:00 - 2:30 pm ET)Vaccines Against Hepatitis C Virus: Harnessing Immunity to Eliminate Global Hepatitis C October 14, 2021Elimination of Perinatal HBV and HCV Transmission: New Opportunities to Improve Screening, Prevention and Care September 9, 2021Hepatitis D Virus Virtual Symposium: Virology, Epidemiology, Clinical Features, Diagnosis, Management, Therapy July 8, 2021Improving Early Detection of HCC: The Quest for New Biomarkers May 13, 2021Leaving No One Behind: Research to Uncover and Address Health Disparities in Hepatitis Burden of Disease and Cure April 8, 2021Collaborative research on Hepatitis C Identification and Treatment Among Persons Who Inject Drugs March 4, 2021Kick-Off: The Road to Elimination and the Role of NIH Research Collaborating NIH Institutes and Organizations for the Webinar Series National Cancer Institute  Coalition for Global Hepatitis Elimination (a Program of the Task Force for Global Health)  NIH Office of AIDS Research (OAR)  National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)  National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB)  National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK)  National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)  National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Cancer Research Donation - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/overview/contributing
txt: There are many ways to give to cancer research or to help the cancer cause. Some people choose to give a cancer research donation to NCI. Although we do not solicit funds or take part in fundraising activities, NCI can receive donations through the Gift Fund or the Breast Cancer Research Stamp. Some people take action in other ways to make a difference in cancer. For example, they may volunteer, donate tissue, or take part in a research study. Below are some of the ways you can provide support to people with cancer. The NCI Office of Budget and Finance (OBF) manages the cancer donations that NCI receives from the public, including funds received through the Breast Cancer Research Stamp. Other cancer donations from the public are deposited into the NCI Gift Fund as well. These donations are authorized by laws enacted by the US Congress. Cancer donations into the NCI Gift Fund are separate from the funding that NCI receives from Congress. NCI’s annual funding from Congress supports NCI operations and administrative costs. NCI applies the Gift Fund donations to other special purposes that support the work of the NCI. As a federal agency of the United States, gifts made directly to the NCI are generally tax deductible as charitable contributions under section 170(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. You may read more details on the IRS website, and contact your tax advisor. Projects supported through the Gift Fund may vary from year to year depending on NCI research priorities. Some of the activities that have received NCI Gift Fund assistance include: supporting special fellowships to train young scientists in cancer research  acquiring lab equipment to support cancer research  assisting patients with financial needs through the NIH Clinical Center's Patient Emergency Fund  supporting workshops and conferences on subjects of special importance to cancer research  supporting Camp Fantastic, a week-long adventure for children ages 7–17 who are undergoing cancer treatment  We accept donations by letter. There are many reasons to donate to cancer research, whether you have had cancer yourself, or you want to support a friend or loved one. If you choose to, they can be in memory or in honor of those in your life who have been touched by cancer. Your donation can also support a specific type of research. Please be sure to include in your letter:
Name (contact person)
Company Name (if applicable)
Street Address
City, State and Zip Code
Phone Number (optional) You can let the NCI decide how best to use your cancer donation. But if you would like to choose the focus, you can do so through: Memorial donations: Please include the name of your loved one in your letter, as well as the name(s) and address(es) of the person(s) whom you would like NCI to acknowledge for the memorial donation (a spouse, sibling, parent, etc.).  Honorary donations: Please write the name of the person your donation is in honor of in your letter, as well as the name(s) and address(es) of the person(s) whom you would like NCI to acknowledge for the honorary donation (the honoree, a spouse, a sibling, a parent, etc.).  Research designation: All donations are applied to projects that support NCI’s mission of cancer research, as determined by the NCI director. However, you may state in your letter if you would like your donation to support a specific type of cancer research.  How to donate If you wish to donate, you may send a check or money order payable to "The National Cancer Institute" and a letter indicating that the donation is to be used for NCI research to this address:
Director
National Cancer Institute
Building 31 Room 11A-16
9000 Rockville Pike
Bethesda, MD 20892 We are happy to answer any questions you may have about donating to the NCI Gift Fund. Please feel free to contact us at 1-800-4-CANCER. Congress enacted the Stamp Out Breast Cancer Act of 1997, which required the United States Postal Service (USPS) to issue a special stamp related to breast cancer, priced at a higher rate than the standard first-class postage for mailing a letter. Seventy percent of the net proceeds from the Breast Cancer Research Stamp surcharge go to the National Institutes of Health for breast cancer research and 30% to the Department of Defense for the same purpose. You can contribute to cancer research by purchasing the Breast Cancer Research Stamp at USPS.com or your local post office. The Breast Cancer Research Stamp is the country’s first fundraising stamp and was first issued on July 29, 1998.  Ethel Kessler of Bethesda, Maryland designed the stamp; it features the phrases, "Fund the Fight" and "Find a Cure" and an illustration of a mythical "goddess of the hunt" by Whitney Sherman of Baltimore, Maryland.  United States Senators Dianne Feinstein (D-CA), Alfonse D’Amato (R-NY), and Lauch Faircloth (R-NC), and United States Representatives Susan Molinari (R-NY), Vic Fazio (D-CA), and Charles W. Norwood (R-GA) were the original sponsors of the legislation.  The stamp was the idea of three passionate people who lobbied for Congress' approval of the stamp and who eventually partnered with Senator Feinstein and her colleagues to advance the creation and issuance the stamp:
	Ernie Bodai, M.D., a Kaiser Permanente breast surgeon who performs lumpectomies and mastectomies on women with breast cancer and the founder of the nonprofit organization Cure Breast Cancer, Inc.
Betsy Mullen, a breast cancer survivor and advocate as well as the founder of WIN Against Breast Cancer and the Breast Buddy Breast Care Program
David Goodman, who lost his first wife to breast cancer  Ernie Bodai, M.D., a Kaiser Permanente breast surgeon who performs lumpectomies and mastectomies on women with breast cancer and the founder of the nonprofit organization Cure Breast Cancer, Inc.  Betsy Mullen, a breast cancer survivor and advocate as well as the founder of WIN Against Breast Cancer and the Breast Buddy Breast Care Program  David Goodman, who lost his first wife to breast cancer  A provision of the Stamp Out Breast Cancer Act, reauthorized until 2027 (P.L. 116-92), requires NIH to submit an annual report on the use of funds received from stamp sales to Congress and the Government Accountability Office. The NCI prepares these reports on behalf of NIH. For an example, see the Breast Cancer Research Stamp Fiscal Year 2020 Report. There are other ways besides money to be involved in the fight against cancer. People often feel that they can make a difference in cancer by taking action in other ways. There are many options to choose from. Giving support and volunteering, helping with outreach and education, and increasing awareness about issues are just some of the many things you can do. Many people find a sense of fulfillment when they help others. Below are some ways you can make a difference in cancer. There are a number of ways you can get involved with efforts aimed at the fight against cancer, or those that help others cope with the disease. You can: Volunteer with cancer patients and their caregivers. You can give support in everyday ways, such as helping people with cancer with meals and errands, or driving them to appointments. Or you can become part of a peer support program to help others with cancer.  Raise awareness about cancer. Learn more about cancer and help others by raising awareness and sharing what you know about the disease. Or help people in their search for information as they look at the many websites and organizations that pertain to cancer. If you’re a cancer survivor or loved one of a patient, you may be able to help people understand the health care system.  Give support to cancer advocacy groups. Cancer-related organizations include many different kinds of groups that help people with cancer. These groups may focus on areas such as service and support, fundraising, research, or policy matters. Many need the help of volunteers.  See the NCI booklet Facing Forward: Making a Difference in Cancer for more information on getting involved in cancer-related activities. Explore the many ways you can participate in cancer research, including treatment and non-treatment studies. You don’t have to have cancer to take part in a research study. There are different ways to get involved in this way. Some kinds of studies you might be able to try are: cancer prevention trials, which try to find better ways to prevent people from getting cancer or lower the chances that they will get it  studies of families with an inherited condition that may increase cancer risk  cohort studies, which follow a group of people over time to study their cancer outcomes  cancer screening studies that look at different methods of detecting cancer  See Partners in Cancer Research for more information. To learn more about prevention trials, see the NCI brochure If You Want to Find Ways to Prevent Cancer, Learn about Prevention Trials. Conducting research with tissue is essential for finding ways to prevent, diagnose, and treat cancer. People with cancer may be asked to give some of their tissue for medical research. (Sometimes tissues are needed from people without cancer, too.) Tissue can include materials from your body such as skin, hair, nails, blood, and urine. By giving your tissue, you could help scientists gain knowledge that might save lives. The tissue you give to research is usually leftover tissue from a medical test. For example, if you have a blood test, you may choose to let the leftover blood be stored and used for future research. Your decision on whether or not to give tissue will not affect your care. Your tissue can’t be used without your consent. You won’t get to choose what kind of research your tissue is used in, just as you can’t choose who gets your blood when you donate at a blood drive. However, you will have the reward of knowing you helped researchers find new ways to prevent and treat cancer. For more information, see the NCI brochures, Providing Your Tissue for Research: What You Need to Know and How You Can Help Medical Research. Donating Your Tissue for Research Tissue donation is a vital part of cancer research, and can be meaningful to patients and researchers. Watch this video to learn more about tissue donation from the perspective of two cancer survivors along with a physician-researcher from the National Cancer Institute. NCI encourages cancer patients, survivors, and family members to consider taking part in planning and communicating about cancer research. Our Office of Advocacy Relations (OAR) works with the entire cancer advocacy community. Their focus is to create relationships between the community and NCI that can improve understanding and progress in cancer research.  Research advocates bring the patient perspective to NCI and serve as a reminder of the need for research focused on patient benefits and outcomes. Advocates also support the sharing and communication of scientific advances that lead to new and better methods to prevent, detect, and treat cancer. Examples of what an advocate role may be include: taking part on a formal advisory board  working on NCI initiatives  sharing research findings with nonscientific audiences  There are many other ways to take part. OAR has more information about research advocacy at NCI. There are many private organizations in the United States that raise money for cancer research and treatment and provide other support activities. Some of these private organizations may refer to NCI and include the toll-free telephone number for NCI’s Cancer Information Service in their fundraising literature. However, NCI is not affiliated with any of these organizations and does not participate in or endorse their fundraising activities. Questions that may help you evaluate the operations of a fundraising organization and make an informed decision about contributing to the organization include: Does the organization make its budget and a complete annual report, including an audit by an independent certified public accountant, public?  Are the group’s fundraising and administrative costs reasonable?  Does the organization use ethical and economical fundraising methods?  Is the organization transparent about how it is managed?  Is the information it distributes misleading, deceptive, or inaccurate?  Better Business Bureaus (BBBs): BBBs report on local fundraising organizations.  BBB Wise Giving Alliance: BBB Wise Giving Alliance is an affiliate of the Council of Better Business Bureaus and they use specific standards for charitable accountability to evaluate the fundraising activities of private, nonprofit organizations. These standards address the practices of public disclosure, financial accountability, fundraising activities and materials, and the governing body of the organization.  The Office of the Attorney General: Most state offices have a consumer protection division that investigates complaints from the public lodged against companies and other organizations. Contact information is located in the blue government pages of your local telephone directory or on state government websites.  Gift Agreements Help: This helpful guide identifies some of the more common issues that emerge in gift agreements and related gift documents that the NCI receives from donors. This is a useful tool to help draft gift agreements in according with NIH Policy Manual Chapter 1135.  State or Local Consumer Protection Offices: Your local consumer protection agency page on USA.gov includes contact information for local consumer protection offices that respond to consumer complaints. A complete list of state, county, and city government consumer protection offices is also available.  The Federal Trade Commission (FTC): FTC’s Charity Scams page includes tips on how to make your donations count by learning about charities and the warning signs of a scam. FTC also offers a publication called Before Giving to a Charity, which has information about making donations to organizations and whom to contact if you have questions or complaints. Although FTC does not investigate individual consumer complaints, complaints reported to the agency can help it detect patterns of wrongdoing and lead to investigations and prosecutions. Complaints can be filed on the FTC Complaint Assistant page. 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Annual Report to the Nation: Overall cancer mortality declines - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2018/annual-report-nation-2018
txt:  Posted:
May 22, 2018  240-760-6600 The latest Annual Report to the Nation on the Status of Cancer finds that overall cancer death rates continue to decline in men, women, and children in the United States in all major racial and ethnic groups. Overall cancer incidence, or rates of new cancers, decreased in men and were stable in women from 1999 to 2014. In a companion study, researchers reported that there has been an increase in incidence of late-stage prostate cancer and that after decades of decline, prostate cancer mortality has stabilized. The annual report is a collaborative effort between the National Cancer Institute (NCI), part of the National Institutes of Health; the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); the American Cancer Society; and the North American Association of Central Cancer Registries (NAACCR). The studies appeared online in Cancer on May 22, 2018. “This year’s report is an encouraging indicator of progress we’re making in cancer research. As overall death rates continue to decline for all major racial and ethnic groups in the United States, it’s clear that interventions are having an impact,” said NCI Director Ned Sharpless, M.D. “The report also highlights areas where more work is needed. With steadfast commitment to patients and their families, we will be able to lower the mortality rates faster and improve the lives of those affected by cancer.” The report includes mortality data through 2015. It shows that, from 1999 to 2015, overall cancer death rates decreased by 1.8 percent per year among men and by 1.4 percent per year among women. From 2011 to 2015, death rates decreased for 11 of the 18 most common cancer types in men and for 14 of the 20 most common cancer types in women. Over the same period, death rates for cancers of the liver, pancreas, and brain and other nervous system increased in both men and women; death rates for cancer of the uterus increased in women; and death rates for cancers of the oral cavity and pharynx and soft tissue increased in men. From 2010 to 2014, incidence rates decreased for 7 of the 17 most common cancer types among men and for 7 of the 18 most common cancer types among women. In the companion study, researchers explored prostate cancer trends in more detail. They found that overall prostate cancer incidence rates declined an average of 6.5 percent each year between 2007 and 2014, from a rate of 163 new cases per 100,000 men in the population in 2007 to 104 new cases per 100,000 in 2014. However, incidence of distant disease—that is, of cancer that has spread from the original tumor to other parts of the body—increased from a low rate of 7.8 new cases per 100,000 in 2010 to 9.2 new cases per 100,000 in 2014. Furthermore, after two decades of decline between 1993 and 2013, prostate cancer mortality leveled off between 2013 and 2015. Although rates of distant disease increased in recent years, there was no increase in the rates of cases with aggressive histologic grade (Gleason score of 9-10). This study also reports a decline in recent prostate-specific antigen (PSA) screening in the population based on a series of national surveys. The reported decline in screening occurred between the 2010 and 2013 surveys, for men between 50 and 74 years of age, and after the 2008 survey, for men age 75 and older. “The increase in late-stage disease and the flattening of the mortality trend occurred contemporaneously with the observed decrease in PSA screening in the population,” said Serban Negoita, M.D., Dr.P.H., of NCI’s Surveillance Research Program and lead author of the prostate cancer report. “Although suggestive, this observation does not demonstrate that one caused the other, as there are many factors that contribute to incidence and mortality, such as improvements in staging and treating cancer. Additional research is needed to get a more comprehensive understanding of the recent trends and the possible relationship with PSA screening, as well as the relationship with other factors that may be associated with these trends.” Findings in the first part of the report show that incidence and death rates for all types of cancer combined were higher in men than in women in every racial and ethnic group. For all cancer sites combined, black men and white women had the highest incidence rates compared to other racial groups, and black men and black women had the highest death rates compared to other racial groups. Non-Hispanic men and women had higher incidence and death rates than those of Hispanic ethnicity. “There continue to be significant declines in the cancer death rate with significant differences in rate by sex, race, and ethnicity,” said Otis W. Brawley, M.D., chief medical officer for ACS. “We need to continue working to understand the reasons for the disparities and how to most efficiently continue supporting and, if possible, accelerate these declines.” The report also describes five-year survival during 2007-2013 by cancer stage at diagnosis for four of the most common cancers—female breast cancer, colorectal cancer, lung and bronchus cancer, and melanoma of the skin. While five-year survival is high for early-stage disease for breast cancer, colorectal cancer, and melanoma, survival remains low for all stages of lung cancer, ranging from 55 percent for Stage I to 4 percent for Stage IV. “This report underscores that if cancer is caught early, when it has the best chance of being treated, patients can live longer,” said CDC Director Robert R. Redfield, M.D. “Early detection and timely, quality treatment are keys to saving lives.” Increases in death rates for several cancers continue to cause concern. Researchers suggest that the increase in liver cancer death rates is related to the high prevalence of hepatitis C virus infection among Baby Boomers, as well as to the high prevalence of obesity in the United States. Obesity is also thought to have contributed to the increase in death rates from cancers of the uterus and pancreas. The recent increase in oral cavity and pharynx cancer death rates among white men is thought to be associated with human papillomavirus infection. “It’s encouraging to see progress in decreasing death rates for many types of cancer,” said Betsy A. Kohler, executive director, NAACCR. “Yet the fact that death rates from several cancers are still on the rise means we need to keep working to find strategies to encourage prevention and continue to make improvements in screening and treatment.” To view the full report, see: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/cncr.31551 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/cncr.31549 For more about the report, see: https://seer.cancer.gov/report_to_nation/ About the National Cancer Institute (NCI): NCI leads the National Cancer Program and NIH’s efforts to dramatically reduce the prevalence of cancer and improve the lives of cancer patients and their families, through research into prevention and cancer biology, the development of new interventions, and the training and mentoring of new researchers. For more information about cancer, please visit the NCI website at cancer.gov or call NCI’s Contact Center (formerly known as the Cancer Information Service) at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit nih.gov. About the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): CDC works 24/7 protecting America’s health, safety, and security. Whether diseases start at home or abroad, are curable or preventable, chronic or acute, or from human activity or deliberate attack, CDC responds to America’s most pressing health threats. CDC is headquartered in Atlanta and has experts located throughout the United States and the world. About the American Cancer Society (ACS): ACS is a global grassroots force of 1.5 million volunteers dedicated to saving lives, celebrating lives, and leading the fight for a world without cancer. From breakthrough research, to free lodging near treatment, a 24/7/365 live helpline, free rides to treatment, and convening powerful activists to create awareness and impact, the Society is the attacking cancer from every angle. For more information go to www.cancer.org. About the North American Association of Central Cancer Registries (NAACCR): The North American Association of Central Cancer Registries, Inc., is a professional organization that develops and promotes uniform data standards for cancer registration; provides education and training; certifies population-based registries; aggregates and publishes data from central cancer registries; and promotes the use of cancer surveillance data and systems for cancer control and epidemiologic research, public health programs, and patient care to reduce the burden of cancer in North America. For more, see naaccr.org.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Head and Neck Cancer—Patient Version - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/head-and-neck
txt: Head and neck cancers include cancers in the larynx, throat, lips, mouth, nose, and salivary glands. Tobacco use, heavy alcohol use, and infection with human papillomavirus (HPV) increase the risk of head and neck cancers. Explore the links on this page to learn more about the different types of head and neck cancer and how they are treated. We also have information about prevention, screening, research, clinical trials, and more. The Head and Neck Cancers fact sheet has additional basic information.  Hypopharyngeal Cancer Treatment  Laryngeal Cancer Treatment  Lip and Oral Cavity Cancer Treatment  Metastatic Squamous Neck Cancer with Occult Primary Treatment  Nasopharyngeal Cancer Treatment  Oropharyngeal Cancer Treatment  Paranasal Sinus and Nasal Cavity Cancer Treatment  Salivary Gland Cancer Treatment   Oral Complications of Chemotherapy and Head/Neck Radiation (PDQ®)  Drugs Approved for Head and Neck Cancer  Find NCI-Supported Clinical Trials   Childhood Esthesioneuroblastoma Treatment  Childhood Laryngeal Tumors Treatment  Childhood Nasopharyngeal Cancer Treatment  Childhood Oral Cavity Cancer Treatment  Childhood Salivary Gland Tumors Treatment   Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer (PDQ®)  Oral Complications of Chemotherapy and Head/Neck Radiation (PDQ®)  Drugs Approved for Head and Neck Cancer  Find NCI-Supported Clinical Trials   Oral Cavity, Oropharynx, Hypopharynx, & Larynx Cancer Prevention   Tobacco  Smokefree.gov  Alcohol and Cancer Risk  HPV and Cancer   Oral Cavity and Nasopharyngeal Cancers Screening  Toripalimab Becomes First Immunotherapy Drug Approved for Nasopharyngeal Cancer Study in India Could Make Immunotherapy More Affordable Worldwide Treatment for Oropharyngeal Cancer: Investigating Ways to Do Less Harm HPV Vaccine May Provide Men with “Herd Immunity” against Oral HPV Infections The information in this section is meant to help you cope with the many issues and concerns that occur when you have cancer.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Global Cancer Conversations - Center for Global Health - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/cgh/global-cancer-conversations
txt: This year marks the 50th anniversary of the National Cancer Act, which includes an explicit global mandate for NCI. This year also marks the 10th anniversary of the creation of a dedicated NCI Center for Global Health (CGH). These simultaneous anniversaries inspired us to create a new series called Global Cancer Conversations. Global Cancer Conversations features informal, prerecorded interview-style discussions between CGH Director Dr. Satish Gopal and key leaders in cancer research and control who have contributed to the global oncology field. The discussions provide opportunities for thoughtful dialogue concerning significant past events, the current state, and achievements in global cancer research and control. It is an opportunity to reflect on historical events to inform and inspire future efforts. Episode 4 - Adeeba Kamarulzaman, MBBS, FRACP, FASc Professor Adeeba Kamarulzaman, M.B.B.S., F.R.A.C.P., F.A.S.C., is a professor of medicine and infectious diseases at Universiti Malaya and an adjunct associate professor at Yale University. She was the dean of the faculty of medicine, Universiti Malaya from 2011 to 2019. She is presently chair of the Universiti Malaya Medical Centre's COVID-19 Task Force, a member of several state COVID-19 Task Forces, and a member of the Malaysian National Recovery Council. Professor Kamarulzaman has played a leading role in the response to the HIV epidemic in Malaysia and globally and is currently the chairman of the Malaysian AIDS Foundation, president of the International AIDS Society, and a member of the WHO Science Council, United Nations AIDS Advisory Group and WHO Academy’s Quality Committee. Her achievements have been recognized through several national and international awards including an honorary doctor of laws from her alma mater, Monash University, for her contributions to medicine and as a health advocate. Join Dr. Kamarulzaman as she discusses her thoughts on where we are in respect to HIV globally, addressing the complexity of the global health context using implementation science, and why we must prioritize these multilevel approaches which extend traditional biomedical research paradigms. Global Cancer Conversations: Felicia Knaul, PhD Felicia Knaul, Ph.D., has played an important role in advocating for and achieving global cancer health equity throughout her career and has led Lancet Commissions to draw attention to this topic. Throughout her career she been deeply engaged in these efforts, formerly at Harvard and currently at the University of Miami where she’s a member of the Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center and directs the Institute for Advanced Study of the Americas. Dr. Knaul is a professor at the Miller School of Medicine at the University of Miami. She maintains a strong and synergistic global program of research and advocacy anchored in Mexico, where she is senior economist at the Mexican Health Foundation. She is also the founding president of Tómatelo a Pecho, A.C., a Mexico-based nongovernmental organization that promotes research, advocacy, awareness, and early detection of women’s health issues in Latin America. Dr. Knaul currently serves as cochair of the Lancet Commission on Cancer and Health Systems and the Lancet Commission on Gender-based Violence and Maltreatment of Young People. She lectures globally on the challenge of breast cancer in low and middle-income countries, both as a patient–advocate and health systems researcher. Learn more as she discusses links between her own cancer journey and her work as a global cancer advocate, researcher, and thought leader. Global Cancer Conversations: Elisabete Weiderpass, MD, MSc, PhD Dr. Elisabete Weiderpass serves as director of the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), which is a dedicated United Nations agency whose mission is cancer research. IARC has been a long-standing and critical scientific partner to NCI. Dr. Weiderpass has been involved in global cancer research in her scientific career long before becoming the IARC director and talks to Dr. Satish Gopal about how her interest in global cancer first developed, being the first female IARC director, and IARC’s medium-term strategy for the next five years. Dr. Weiderpass is a Brazilian cancer researcher who is a naturalized Swedish and Finnish citizen. She is an expert in cancer epidemiology and cancer prevention. She took office as IARC director on January 1, 2019. Dr. Weiderpass previously served as leader of the Department of Research at the Cancer Registry of Norway, and of the Genetic Epidemiology Group at the Folkhälsan Research Center in Finland. She was a professor of medical epidemiology at the Karolinska Institutet in Stockholm, Sweden, and a professor of cancer epidemiology at the Arctic University of Norway. She also held adjunct professorship positions in cancer epidemiology in Brazil, China, and the Islamic Republic of Iran, and was a visiting professor in Kuwait. She is the author of more than 700 scientific publications in peer-reviewed international journals. Global Cancer Conversations: Harold Varmus, M.D. In 2011, Dr. Harold Varmus served as the NCI director and created CGH. While global health at NCI long predates the creation of CGH and even now is not confined to CGH, this was an opportunity to develop an intentional international program to improve cancer care and cancer research throughout the world. This new center would allow NCI to play a major role in making a systematic approach to global cancer research and global cancer health. Watch now to hear more about the creation of CGH and future opportunities. Dr. Varmus is currently the Lewis Thomas University Professor of Medicine at Weill Cornell Medicine and a senior associate at the New York Genome Center. He previously was the director of the National Institutes of Health (1993–1999), president and CEO of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York (2000–2010), and director of NCI (2010–2015). In 1989, while on faculty at the University of California, San Francisco, Dr. Varmus and J. M. Bishop won the Nobel Prize in Medicine or Physiology for their work on oncogenes. Dr. Varmus has also been awarded the Albert Lasker Award for Basic Medical Research, the Alfred P. Sloan Prize, and is a foreign member of the Royal Society. Dr. Varmus is a cofounder of the Public Library of Science and is closely involved with numerous global health organizations.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: ABVE - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/abve
txt: This chemotherapy combination contains the drugs doxorubicin hydrochloride (Adriamycin), bleomycin, vincristine sulfate, and etoposide phosphate. Combinations usually work better than single drugs because 
         different drugs kill 
         cancer 
         cells in different ways. Each of the 
         drugs 
         in this
         combination
         is approved by the
         Food and Drug 
         Administration (FDA)
         to treat cancer or conditions related to 
         cancer. ABVE is used to treat: Hodgkin lymphoma in children. This combination may also be used with other drugs or treatments or to treat other types of cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia Treatment (PDQ®) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/leukemia/hp/cml-treatment-pdq
txt:  General Information About Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML)  Histopathology and Phases of CML  Treatment Option Overview for CML  Treatment of Chronic-Phase CML  Treatment of Accelerated-Phase CML  Treatment of Blastic-Phase CML  Treatment of Relapsed CML  Key References for CML  Latest Updates to This Summary (03/22/2024)  About This PDQ Summary  Incidence and Mortality Molecular Genetics Clinical Presentation Risk Factors Diagnostic Evaluation Prognosis and Survival Estimated new cases and deaths from CML in the United States in 2024:[1] New cases: 9,280. Deaths:  1,280. CML is one of a group of diseases called the
myeloproliferative disorders.  Other related entities include the following: Polycythemia vera. Myelofibrosis. Essential thrombocythemia. For more information, see Chronic Myeloproliferative Neoplasms Treatment. CML is identified by too many myeloblasts in the blood and bone marrow, and the disease worsens as the number of myeloblasts increase. CML is a clonal disorder that is easily diagnosed
because the leukemic cells of more than 95% of patients have a distinctive
cytogenetic abnormality, the Philadelphia  chromosome (Ph).[2] The Ph chromosome
 results from a reciprocal translocation between the long arms of
chromosomes 9 and 22, and it is demonstrable in all hematopoietic precursors.[3] 
This translocation results in the transfer of the ABL oncogene on chromosome 9 to an
area of chromosome 22 termed the breakpoint cluster region (within the BCR gene).[3]  This, in
turn, results in a BCR::ABL fusion gene and in the production of an abnormal
tyrosine kinase protein that causes the disordered myelopoiesis found in CML. 
Using peripheral blood, molecular techniques can detect the presence of the 9;22 translocation. Although CML may present without symptoms, splenomegaly is the most common finding during physical examination at the time of diagnosis.[4]  The spleen may be enormous, filling most of the abdomen, causing pain or a feeling of fullness and
presenting a significant clinical problem, or the spleen may be only minimally
enlarged.  In about 10% of patients, the spleen is neither palpable nor
enlarged on computed tomography (CT) scan. Patients may also present with the following symptoms: Fatigue. Unexplained weight loss. Drenching night sweats. Fever. Transition between the chronic, accelerated, and blastic
phases may occur gradually over 1 year or more, or it may occur
abruptly (blast crisis).    Patients with accelerated-phase CML show signs of progression without meeting the criteria for blast crisis (acute leukemia). Signs and symptoms that indicate a change to accelerated-phase CML include the following: Progressive splenomegaly. Increased leukocytosis and/or thrombocytosis. Progressive anemia. Signs and symptoms that indicate a change to a blast crisis, in addition to the accelerated-phase CML symptoms, include the following: Thrombocytopenia. Increasing and painful splenomegaly or hepatomegaly. Fever. Bone pain. Development of destructive bone lesions. In the accelerated phase, differentiated cells persist,
although they often show increasing morphologic abnormalities. The patient experiences increased
anemia, thrombocytopenia, and marrow fibrosis.[4] Risk factors for CML include the following: Older age. Exposure to high-dose ionizing radiation. In addition to a health history and physical examination, the initial workup may include the following: Complete blood count with differential. Blood chemistry studies. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy. In routine presentations of CML, the utility of bone marrow aspiration and biopsy for all newly diagnosed patients is questionable outside the context of a clinical trial. Bone marrow testing is appropriate for patients with clinical signs of accelerated phase or blast crisis (fever, enlarged spleen, or >20% blasts in the peripheral blood).[5] Cytogenetic analysis. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). FISH of the BCR::ABL translocation can be performed using the bone marrow aspirate or peripheral blood of patients with CML.[4] Reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). A small subset of patients has the BCR::ABL
rearrangement detectable only by RT-PCR,
which is the most sensitive technique currently available.  Patients with RT-PCR evidence of the BCR::ABL fusion gene appear clinically and prognostically
identical to patients with a classic Ph chromosome. However, patients who are
BCR::ABL-negative by RT-PCR have a clinical course more consistent with chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia, which is a distinct clinical entity related to myelodysplastic
syndrome.[6-8] CT scan. The median age of patients with Ph chromosome–positive CML is 67 years.[9] With the advent of the oral tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) , the median survival is projected to approach normal life expectancy for most patients.[10] Ph chromosome–negative CML is a poorly defined
entity that is less clearly distinguished from other myeloproliferative
syndromes.  Patients with Ph chromosome–negative CML generally have a poorer response to treatment
and shorter survival than Ph chromosome–positive patients.[11]  Ph chromosome–negative patients who have BCR::ABL
gene rearrangements detectable by Southern blot analysis, however,  have prognoses
equivalent to Ph chromosome–positive patients.[6,12] American Cancer Society: Cancer Facts and Figures 2024. American Cancer Society, 2024. Available online. Last accessed January 17, 2024. Jabbour E, Kantarjian H: Chronic myeloid leukemia: 2020 update on diagnosis, therapy and monitoring. Am J Hematol 95 (6): 691-709, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] Deininger MW, Goldman JM, Melo JV: The molecular biology of chronic myeloid leukemia. Blood 96 (10): 3343-56, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Jabbour E, Kantarjian H: Chronic myeloid leukemia: 2012 update on diagnosis, monitoring, and management. Am J Hematol 87 (11): 1037-45, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Hidalgo-Lόpez JE, Kanagal-Shamanna R, Quesada AE, et al.: Bone marrow core biopsy in 508 consecutive patients with chronic myeloid leukemia: Assessment of potential value. Cancer 124 (19): 3849-3855, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Martiat P, Michaux JL, Rodhain J: Philadelphia-negative (Ph-) chronic myeloid leukemia (CML): comparison with Ph+ CML and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. The Groupe Français de Cytogénétique Hématologique. Blood 78 (1): 205-11, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Oscier DG: Atypical chronic myeloid leukaemia, a distinct clinical entity related to the myelodysplastic syndrome? Br J Haematol 92 (3): 582-6, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Kurzrock R, Bueso-Ramos CE, Kantarjian H, et al.: BCR rearrangement-negative chronic myelogenous leukemia revisited. J Clin Oncol 19 (11): 2915-26, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Lee SJ, Anasetti C, Horowitz MM, et al.: Initial therapy for chronic myelogenous leukemia: playing the odds. J Clin Oncol 16 (9): 2897-903, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Bower H, Björkholm M, Dickman PW, et al.: Life Expectancy of Patients With Chronic Myeloid Leukemia Approaches the Life Expectancy of the General Population. J Clin Oncol 34 (24): 2851-7, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Onida F, Ball G, Kantarjian HM, et al.: Characteristics and outcome of patients with Philadelphia chromosome negative, bcr/abl negative chronic myelogenous leukemia. Cancer 95 (8): 1673-84, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Cortes JE, Talpaz M, Beran M, et al.: Philadelphia chromosome-negative chronic myelogenous leukemia with rearrangement of the breakpoint cluster region. Long-term follow-up results. Cancer 75 (2): 464-70, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Chronic-Phase CML Accelerated-Phase CML Blastic-Phase CML Histopathological examination of the bone marrow aspirate of patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) demonstrates a shift in the
myeloid series to immature forms that increase in number as patients progress
to the blastic phase of the disease.  The marrow is hypercellular, and
differential counts of both marrow and blood show a spectrum of mature and
immature granulocytes like that found in normal marrow.  Increased
numbers of eosinophils or basophils are often present, and monocytosis is sometimes seen.  Increased megakaryocytes are often found in the marrow,
and sometimes fragments of megakaryocytic nuclei are present in the blood,
especially when the platelet count is very high.  The percentage of lymphocytes
is reduced in both the marrow and blood compared with normal samples.
The myeloid:erythroid ratio in the marrow is usually greatly elevated.  The
leukocyte alkaline phosphatase enzyme is either absent or markedly reduced in
the neutrophils of patients with CML.[1] Most patients do not require bone marrow examination. However, bone marrow testing is appropriate for patients with fever, malaise, rapidly enlarging splenomegaly, and more than 10% circulating blast. In patients with CML, bone marrow sampling is performed to assess cellularity, fibrosis, and cytogenetics. 
Reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) or fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analyses using blood or marrow aspirates demonstrate the 9;22
translocation.[1] Chronic-phase  CML is characterized by bone marrow and cytogenetic findings as listed below with
less than 10% blasts and promyelocytes in the peripheral blood and bone marrow.[2]
The following factors are predictive of a shorter chronic phase after treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors: Older age.[3] Cytogenetic abnormalities in addition to the Philadelphia chromosome.[3,4] A
higher proportion of marrow or peripheral blood blasts.[3] Anemia.[3] Predictive models using multivariate analysis have been derived.[5-7] The rate of progression from chronic phase
to blast crisis is 5% to 10% in the first 2 years and 20% in subsequent
years.[5] For more information, see the Treatment of Chronic-Phase CML section. Accelerated-phase  CML is characterized by 10% to 19% blasts in either the peripheral blood or bone
marrow.[2] For more information, see the Treatment of Accelerated-Phase CML section. Blastic-phase  CML is characterized by 20% or more blasts in the peripheral blood or bone marrow. When 20% or more blasts are present along with fever, malaise, and
progressive splenomegaly, the patient has entered blast crisis.[2] For more information, see the Treatment of Blastic-Phase CML section. Jabbour E, Kantarjian H: Chronic myeloid leukemia: 2012 update on diagnosis, monitoring, and management. Am J Hematol 87 (11): 1037-45, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Cortes JE, Talpaz M, O'Brien S, et al.: Staging of chronic myeloid leukemia in the imatinib era: an evaluation of the World Health Organization proposal. Cancer 106 (6): 1306-15, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Lauseker M, Bachl K, Turkina A, et al.: Prognosis of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia presenting in advanced phase is defined mainly by blast count, but also by age, chromosomal aberrations and hemoglobin. Am J Hematol 94 (11): 1236-1243, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Fabarius A, Leitner A, Hochhaus A, et al.: Impact of additional cytogenetic aberrations at diagnosis on prognosis of CML: long-term observation of 1151 patients from the randomized CML Study IV. Blood 118 (26): 6760-8, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Sokal JE, Baccarani M, Russo D, et al.: Staging and prognosis in chronic myelogenous leukemia. Semin Hematol 25 (1): 49-61, 1988. [PUBMED Abstract] Hasford J, Pfirrmann M, Hehlmann R, et al.: A new prognostic score for survival of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia treated with interferon alfa. Writing Committee for the Collaborative CML Prognostic Factors Project Group. J Natl Cancer Inst 90 (11): 850-8, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Kvasnicka HM, Thiele J, Schmitt-Graeff A, et al.: Bone marrow features improve prognostic efficiency in multivariate risk classification of chronic-phase Ph(1+) chronic myelogenous leukemia: a multicenter trial. J Clin Oncol 19 (12): 2994-3009, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Targeted Therapy With Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors (TKIs) Allogeneic Bone Marrow Transplant (BMT) or Stem Cell Transplant (SCT) Interferon Alfa Hydroxyurea Treatment of patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is usually initiated at
diagnosis, which is based on the presence of an elevated white
blood cell count, splenomegaly, thrombocytosis, and identification of the BCR::ABL translocation.[1] The optimal front-line treatment for patients with chronic-phase CML involves specific inhibitors of the BCR::ABL tyrosine kinase. Although imatinib mesylate has been extensively  studied in patients with CML, TKIs with greater potency and selectivity for BCR::ABL than imatinib have also been evaluated.[1,2] Allogeneic BMT or SCT has also been used with curative intent.[3] Long-term data beyond 10 years of therapy are available, and most long-term survivors show no evidence of the BCR::ABL translocation by any available test (e.g., cytogenetics, reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction, or fluorescence in situ hybridization).  Some patients, however,  are not eligible for this approach because of age, comorbid conditions, or lack of a suitable donor.  In addition, substantial morbidity and mortality result from allogeneic  BMT or SCT; a 5% to 10% treatment-related mortality can be expected, depending on whether a donor is related and the presence of mismatched antigens.[3] Evidence (allogeneic SCT vs. drug treatment): In a prospective trial of 427 transplant-eligible, previously untreated patients, 166 patients were allocated to allogeneic SCT, and 261 patients were allocated to drug treatment (mostly imatinib).[3][Level of evidence C1] No difference in 10-year overall survival was reported between the treatment groups.Similar outcomes were seen in patients who underwent allogeneic SCT because of TKI intolerance or nonadherence.[4] No difference in 10-year overall survival was reported between the treatment groups. Similar outcomes were seen in patients who underwent allogeneic SCT because of TKI intolerance or nonadherence.[4] Long-term data are also available for patients treated with interferon alfa.[5-7] Approximately 10% to 20% of these patients have a complete cytogenetic response with no evidence of BCR::ABL translocation by any available test, and most of these patients are disease-free beyond 10 years.  Maintenance therapy with interferon is required, however, and some patients experience side effects that preclude continued treatment. Hydroxyurea is superior to busulfan in the chronic phase of
CML, with significantly longer median survival and significantly fewer severe
adverse effects.[8]  A dose of 40 mg/kg per day is often
used initially, and frequently results in a rapid reduction of the white blood
cell (WBC) count.  When the WBC count drops below 20 × 109/L,
the hydroxyurea is often reduced and titrated to maintain a WBC count between
5 × 109/L and 20 × 109/L. Hydroxyurea is used primarily to stabilize patients with hyperleukocytosis or as palliative therapy for patients who have not responded to other therapies. Cortes J, Pavlovsky C, Saußele S: Chronic myeloid leukaemia. Lancet 398 (10314): 1914-1926, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Jabbour E, Kantarjian H: Chronic myeloid leukemia: 2020 update on diagnosis, therapy and monitoring. Am J Hematol 95 (6): 691-709, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] Gratwohl A, Pfirrmann M, Zander A, et al.: Long-term outcome of patients with newly diagnosed chronic myeloid leukemia: a randomized comparison of stem cell transplantation with drug treatment. Leukemia 30 (3): 562-9, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Wu J, Chen Y, Hageman L, et al.: Late mortality after bone marrow transplant for chronic myelogenous leukemia in the context of prior tyrosine kinase inhibitor exposure: A Blood or Marrow Transplant Survivor Study (BMTSS) report. Cancer 125 (22): 4033-4042, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Ozer H, George SL, Schiffer CA, et al.: Prolonged subcutaneous administration of recombinant alpha 2b interferon in patients with previously untreated Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic-phase chronic myelogenous leukemia: effect on remission duration and survival: Cancer and Leukemia Group B study 8583. Blood 82 (10): 2975-84, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Kantarjian HM, Smith TL, O'Brien S, et al.: Prolonged survival in chronic myelogenous leukemia after cytogenetic response to interferon-alpha therapy. The Leukemia Service. Ann Intern Med 122 (4): 254-61, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Long-term follow-up of the Italian trial of interferon-alpha versus conventional chemotherapy in chronic myeloid leukemia. The Italian Cooperative Study Group on Chronic Myeloid Leukemia. Blood 92 (5): 1541-8, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Hehlmann R, Heimpel H, Hasford J, et al.: Randomized comparison of busulfan and hydroxyurea in chronic myelogenous leukemia: prolongation of survival by hydroxyurea. The German CML Study Group. Blood 82 (2): 398-407, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Targeted Therapy With TKIsCan TKIs be discontinued? Allogeneic BMT or SCT Current Clinical Trials Can TKIs be discontinued? Treatment options for chronic-phase chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) include the following: Targeted therapy with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Allogeneic bone marrow transplant (BMT) or stem cell transplant (SCT). The preferred initial treatment  for patients with newly diagnosed chronic-phase CML could be any of the specific inhibitors of the BCR::ABL tyrosine kinase (including nilotinib, dasatinib, bosutinib, or imatinib).[1] With any of these agents, the 10-year event-free survival and overall survival (OS) rates exceed 80%.[2-4] CML response rate abbreviations used in this section include the following: DMR: Deep molecular response (previously called CMR [complete molecular response]). This means greater than 4-log reduction (BCR::ABL  ≤ 0.01%) and is also called MR 4 (molecular response 4). MR 4.5 is designated for BCR::ABL  ≤ 0.0032%, and MR 5 is designated for BCR::ABL  ≤ 0.001%. EMR: Early molecular response. This means a greater than 1-log reduction (BCR::ABL ≤ 10%) at 3 months. MMR: Major molecular response. This means a greater than 3-log reduction (BCR::ABL  ≤ 0.1%). A  BCR::ABL transcript level of 10% or less in patients after 3 months of  treatment with a specific TKI (deemed EMR) is associated with the best prognosis in terms of failure-free survival, progression-free survival (PFS), and OS.[5-10] However, in a retrospective analysis, even patients with a BCR::ABL transcript level greater than 10% after 3 months of therapy did well when the halving time was less than 76 days.[11] Mandating a change of therapy based on this 10% transcript level at 3 to 6 months is problematic because 75% of patients do well even with a suboptimal response.[12] After 1 year, the preferred response target is an MMR, which is defined as a BCR::ABL level of less than or equal to 0.1%. The optimal  target is a DMR, which is defined as under 4 logs (BCR::ABL ≤ 0.01%) or undetectable, which is usually a BCR::ABL level of ≤ 0.001% (MR 5).[13] Evidence (targeted therapy with TKIs): A randomized prospective study of 846 patients compared  nilotinib with imatinib.[14][Level of evidence B3]The rate of MMR at 24 months was 71% and 67% for patients who received two-dose schedules of nilotinib and 44% for patients who received imatinib (P < .0001 for both comparisons).Progression to accelerated-phase CML or blast crisis occurred in 17 patients who received imatinib (14%), but  this progression only occurred in two patients who received nilotinib 300 mg twice daily (<1%, P = .0003) and in  five patients who received nilotinib 400 mg twice daily (1.8%, P = .0089). A randomized prospective study of 519 patients compared dasatinib with imatinib, with the following results:[15][Level of evidence B3]The rate of MMR at 12 months was 46% for patients who received dasatinib and 28% for patients who received imatinib (P < .0001).The rate of  MMR at 24 months was 64% for patients who received dasatinib and 46% for patients who received imatinib (P < .0001).At 5 years, there was no difference in PFS or OS.Progression to accelerated-phase CML or blast crisis occurred in 13 patients  (5%) who received imatinib and in 6 patients (2.3%) who received dasatinib (not statistically different). A randomized prospective study of 536 patients compared bosutinib with imatinib.[16][Level of evidence B3]The MMR rate at 5 years was 73.9% for patients in the bosutinib arm versus 64.6% for patients in the imatinib arm (hazard ratio [HR], 1.57; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.08–2.28; P = .0075). At 5 years, a DMR (4.5 logs) was attained by 47.4% of patients in the bosutinib arm and 36.6% of patients in the imatinib arm (HR, 1.57; 95% CI, 1.11–2.22).[16]Progression to accelerated-phase CML or blast crisis occurred in four patients (1.6%) who received bosutinib and in six patients (2.5%) who received imatinib. The rate of MMR at 24 months was 71% and 67% for patients who received two-dose schedules of nilotinib and 44% for patients who received imatinib (P < .0001 for both comparisons). Progression to accelerated-phase CML or blast crisis occurred in 17 patients who received imatinib (14%), but  this progression only occurred in two patients who received nilotinib 300 mg twice daily (<1%, P = .0003) and in  five patients who received nilotinib 400 mg twice daily (1.8%, P = .0089). The rate of MMR at 12 months was 46% for patients who received dasatinib and 28% for patients who received imatinib (P < .0001). The rate of  MMR at 24 months was 64% for patients who received dasatinib and 46% for patients who received imatinib (P < .0001). At 5 years, there was no difference in PFS or OS. Progression to accelerated-phase CML or blast crisis occurred in 13 patients  (5%) who received imatinib and in 6 patients (2.3%) who received dasatinib (not statistically different). The MMR rate at 5 years was 73.9% for patients in the bosutinib arm versus 64.6% for patients in the imatinib arm (hazard ratio [HR], 1.57; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.08–2.28; P = .0075). At 5 years, a DMR (4.5 logs) was attained by 47.4% of patients in the bosutinib arm and 36.6% of patients in the imatinib arm (HR, 1.57; 95% CI, 1.11–2.22).[16] Progression to accelerated-phase CML or blast crisis occurred in four patients (1.6%) who received bosutinib and in six patients (2.5%) who received imatinib. In randomized prospective trials, nilotinib, dasatinib, and bosutinib showed higher rates of earlier MMR compared with imatinib. It is unclear whether this will translate to improved long-term outcomes.[8,9,16][Level of evidence B3] A dose-ranging phase II study of dasatinib in patients older than 70 years showed optimal response and reduction of toxicity starting at 20 mg once daily with dose escalation if needed, versus the standard dose of 100 mg daily.[17][Level of evidence C3] For patients who obtain a DMR (deep molecular response), it is unclear if TKI therapy can be discontinued. Several nonrandomized reports are summarized as follows:[18-22][Level of evidence C3] Patients who have taken a TKI for more than 3 to 5 years and attained a DMR (molecular remission,  4.5; BCR::ABL ≤ 0.0032%) are the best candidates to consider stopping therapy. 50% of patients will experience a relapse of their disease  if they discontinue TKI therapy. However, a retrospective analysis with a median follow-up of 36 months found that patients who were in DMR (4 to 4.5 logs) for 5 or more years had a relapse rate of approximately 10%.[23][Level of evidence C3] Almost all patients who relapse based on BCR::ABL RT-PCR quantitative testing can be successfully reinduced with the previous TKI. However, after the reinduction of a previous TKI, the duration of remissions or the depth of responses are not known. There are insufficient data to recommend routinely discontinuing TKIs, even in this select group of patients. Follow-up (i.e., at least every 3 months initially, although the precise interval is not well-defined) is required after stopping therapy because relapses have been noted even after 2 to 3 years. A withdrawal syndrome of muscle and joint pain has been reported after discontinuing TKI therapy.[24] Quality-of-life assessments suggest that there are improvements in social function, diarrhea, and fatigue after stopping TKI therapy.[25][Level of evidence C1] The only consistently successful curative treatment of patients with CML has been allogeneic BMT or SCT.[26-28]  Patients younger than 60 years with an identical twin or with
human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-matched siblings can be considered for BMT early in the chronic phase.  Although the procedure is associated with
considerable acute morbidity and mortality, 50% to 70%
of patients who undergo transplant in the chronic phase appear to be cured. The
results are better in younger patients,  especially for those younger than 20 years.
The outcomes of patients who undergo transplant in the accelerated and blastic phases of the
disease are progressively worse.[29,30]  Most transplant series suggest improved survival when the
procedure is performed within 1 year of diagnosis.[31-33][Level of evidence C1]  The data supporting early transplant, however,  have never been confirmed in controlled
trials. Evidence (allogeneic SCT): In a randomized clinical trial, patients underwent allogeneic SCT after receiving preparative therapy with
either cyclophosphamide and TBI or busulfan and
cyclophosphamide without total-body irradiation (TBI). The following results were reported:  [34][Level of evidence A1] Disease-free survival and OS were comparable between arms.Busulfan and cyclophosphamide without TBI was associated with less graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and fewer fevers, hospitalizations, and hospital days. A retrospective review of 2,444 patients who underwent myeloablative allogeneic SCT reported the following:[35] The 15-year OS rates were 88% (95% CI, 86%–90%) for sibling-matched transplant recipients and 87% (95% CI, 83%–90%) for unrelated-donor transplant recipients.The cumulative incidences of relapse were 8% (95% CI, 7%–10%) for sibling-matched transplant recipients and 2% (95% CI, 1%– 4%) for unrelated-donor transplant recipients. In a prospective trial of 354 patients younger than  60 years, 123 of 135 patients with a matched, related donor underwent early allogeneic SCT while the others received interferon-based therapy and imatinib at relapse. Some patients also underwent a matched unrelated-donor SCT in remission.[36][Level of evidence B4]With a 9-year median follow-up, survival still favored the drug treatment arm (P = .049), but most of the benefit was early from  transplant-related mortality, with the survival curves converging by 8 years. Disease-free survival and OS were comparable between arms. Busulfan and cyclophosphamide without TBI was associated with less graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and fewer fevers, hospitalizations, and hospital days. The 15-year OS rates were 88% (95% CI, 86%–90%) for sibling-matched transplant recipients and 87% (95% CI, 83%–90%) for unrelated-donor transplant recipients. The cumulative incidences of relapse were 8% (95% CI, 7%–10%) for sibling-matched transplant recipients and 2% (95% CI, 1%– 4%) for unrelated-donor transplant recipients. With a 9-year median follow-up, survival still favored the drug treatment arm (P = .049), but most of the benefit was early from  transplant-related mortality, with the survival curves converging by 8 years. Although most relapses occur within 5 years
of transplant, relapses have occurred as late as 15 years after a BMT.[37] In a molecular analysis of 243 patients who underwent allogeneic BMT over a 20-year interval, only 15% had no detectable BCR::ABL transcript by PCR analysis.[38] 
The risk of relapse appears to be less in patients who underwent transplant early in
disease and in patients who develop chronic GVHD.[30,39] 
In a retrospective review, patients with relapsed disease after allogeneic transplant who received TKI therapy had a  3-year OS rate of 60%.[40][Level of evidence C1] With the advent of imatinib, dasatinib, bosutinib, and nilotinib therapy, the timing and sequence of allogeneic BMT or SCT has been questioned.[41] Allogeneic SCT is the preferred choice for some patients presenting with blastic-phase disease, some patients with a T315I mutation resistant to ponatinib (an oral TKI), and for patients with complete intolerance to the pharmacological options.[42]  Similar outcomes were seen in patients who underwent allogeneic SCT because of TKI intolerance or nonadherence.[43] Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Wei G, Rafiyath S, Liu D: First-line treatment for chronic myeloid leukemia: dasatinib, nilotinib, or imatinib. J Hematol Oncol 3: 47, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Hochhaus A, Larson RA, Guilhot F, et al.: Long-Term Outcomes of Imatinib Treatment for Chronic Myeloid Leukemia. N Engl J Med 376 (10): 917-927, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Masarova L, Cortes JE, Patel KP, et al.: Long-term results of a phase 2 trial of nilotinib 400 mg twice daily in newly diagnosed patients with chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia. Cancer 126 (7): 1448-1459, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] Maiti A, Cortes JE, Patel KP, et al.: Long-term results of frontline dasatinib in chronic myeloid leukemia. Cancer 126 (7): 1502-1511, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] Marin D, Ibrahim AR, Lucas C, et al.: Assessment of BCR-ABL1 transcript levels at 3 months is the only requirement for predicting outcome for patients with chronic myeloid leukemia treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors. J Clin Oncol 30 (3): 232-8, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Branford S, Kim DW, Soverini S, et al.: Initial molecular response at 3 months may predict both response and event-free survival at 24 months in imatinib-resistant or -intolerant patients with Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myeloid leukemia in chronic phase treated with nilotinib. J Clin Oncol 30 (35): 4323-9, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Marin D, Hedgley C, Clark RE, et al.: Predictive value of early molecular response in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia treated with first-line dasatinib. Blood 120 (2): 291-4, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Jabbour E, Kantarjian HM, Saglio G, et al.: Early response with dasatinib or imatinib in chronic myeloid leukemia: 3-year follow-up from a randomized phase 3 trial (DASISION). Blood 123 (4): 494-500, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Hughes TP, Saglio G, Kantarjian HM, et al.: Early molecular response predicts outcomes in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in chronic phase treated with frontline nilotinib or imatinib. Blood 123 (9): 1353-60, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Neelakantan P, Gerrard G, Lucas C, et al.: Combining BCR-ABL1 transcript levels at 3 and 6 months in chronic myeloid leukemia: implications for early intervention strategies. Blood 121 (14): 2739-42, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Branford S, Yeung DT, Parker WT, et al.: Prognosis for patients with CML and >10% BCR-ABL1 after 3 months of imatinib depends on the rate of BCR-ABL1 decline. Blood 124 (4): 511-8, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Baccarani M, Deininger MW, Rosti G, et al.: European LeukemiaNet recommendations for the management of chronic myeloid leukemia: 2013. Blood 122 (6): 872-84, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Shanmuganathan N, Hughes TP: Molecular monitoring in CML: how deep? How often? How should it influence therapy? Blood 132 (20): 2125-2133, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Kantarjian HM, Hochhaus A, Saglio G, et al.: Nilotinib versus imatinib for the treatment of patients with newly diagnosed chronic phase, Philadelphia chromosome-positive, chronic myeloid leukaemia: 24-month minimum follow-up of the phase 3 randomised ENESTnd trial. Lancet Oncol 12 (9): 841-51, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Cortes JE, Saglio G, Kantarjian HM, et al.: Final 5-Year Study Results of DASISION: The Dasatinib Versus Imatinib Study in Treatment-Naïve Chronic Myeloid Leukemia Patients Trial. J Clin Oncol 34 (20): 2333-40, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Brümmendorf TH, Cortes JE, Milojkovic D, et al.: Bosutinib versus imatinib for newly diagnosed chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia: final results from the BFORE trial. Leukemia 36 (7): 1825-1833, 2022. [PUBMED Abstract] Murai K, Ureshino H, Kumagai T, et al.: Low-dose dasatinib in older patients with chronic myeloid leukaemia in chronic phase (DAVLEC): a single-arm, multicentre, phase 2 trial. Lancet Haematol 8 (12): e902-e911, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Saussele S, Richter J, Guilhot J, et al.: Discontinuation of tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy in chronic myeloid leukaemia (EURO-SKI): a prespecified interim analysis of a prospective, multicentre, non-randomised, trial. Lancet Oncol 19 (6): 747-757, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Mahon FX, Boquimpani C, Kim DW, et al.: Treatment-Free Remission After Second-Line Nilotinib Treatment in Patients With Chronic Myeloid Leukemia in Chronic Phase: Results From a Single-Group, Phase 2, Open-Label Study. Ann Intern Med 168 (7): 461-470, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Legros L, Nicolini FE, Etienne G, et al.: Second tyrosine kinase inhibitor discontinuation attempt in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. Cancer 123 (22): 4403-4410, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Chamoun K, Kantarjian H, Atallah R, et al.: Tyrosine kinase inhibitor discontinuation in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia: a single-institution experience. J Hematol Oncol 12 (1): 1, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Atallah E, Schiffer CA, Radich JP, et al.: Assessment of Outcomes After Stopping Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors Among Patients With Chronic Myeloid Leukemia: A Nonrandomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Oncol 7 (1): 42-50, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Haddad FG, Sasaki K, Issa GC, et al.: Treatment-free remission in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia following the discontinuation of tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Am J Hematol 97 (7): 856-864, 2022. [PUBMED Abstract] Richter J, Söderlund S, Lübking A, et al.: Musculoskeletal pain in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia after discontinuation of imatinib: a tyrosine kinase inhibitor withdrawal syndrome? J Clin Oncol 32 (25): 2821-3, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Schoenbeck KL, Atallah E, Lin L, et al.: Patient-Reported Functional Outcomes in Patients With Chronic Myeloid Leukemia After Stopping Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors. J Natl Cancer Inst 114 (1): 160-164, 2022. [PUBMED Abstract] Gratwohl A, Hermans J: Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for chronic myeloid leukemia. Working Party Chronic Leukemia of the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT). Bone Marrow Transplant 17 (Suppl 3): S7-9, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Crawley C, Szydlo R, Lalancette M, et al.: Outcomes of reduced-intensity transplantation for chronic myeloid leukemia: an analysis of prognostic factors from the Chronic Leukemia Working Party of the EBMT. Blood 106 (9): 2969-76, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Bacher U, Klyuchnikov E, Zabelina T, et al.: The changing scene of allogeneic stem cell transplantation for chronic myeloid leukemia--a report from the German Registry covering the period from 1998 to 2004. Ann Hematol 88 (12): 1237-47, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Wagner JE, Zahurak M, Piantadosi S, et al.: Bone marrow transplantation of chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase: evaluation of risks and benefits. J Clin Oncol 10 (5): 779-89, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Enright H, Davies SM, DeFor T, et al.: Relapse after non-T-cell-depleted allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for chronic myelogenous leukemia: early transplantation, use of an unrelated donor, and chronic graft-versus-host disease are protective. Blood 88 (2): 714-20, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Goldman JM, Szydlo R, Horowitz MM, et al.: Choice of pretransplant treatment and timing of transplants for chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase. Blood 82 (7): 2235-8, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Clift RA, Appelbaum FR, Thomas ED: Treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia by marrow transplantation. Blood 82 (7): 1954-6, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Hansen JA, Gooley TA, Martin PJ, et al.: Bone marrow transplants from unrelated donors for patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 338 (14): 962-8, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Clift RA, Buckner CD, Thomas ED, et al.: Marrow transplantation for chronic myeloid leukemia: a randomized study comparing cyclophosphamide and total body irradiation with busulfan and cyclophosphamide. Blood 84 (6): 2036-43, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Goldman JM, Majhail NS, Klein JP, et al.: Relapse and late mortality in 5-year survivors of myeloablative allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation for chronic myeloid leukemia in first chronic phase. J Clin Oncol 28 (11): 1888-95, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Hehlmann R, Berger U, Pfirrmann M, et al.: Drug treatment is superior to allografting as first-line therapy in chronic myeloid leukemia. Blood 109 (11): 4686-92, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Maziarz R: Transplantation for CML: lifelong PCR monitoring? Blood  107 (10): 3820, 2006. Kaeda J, O'Shea D, Szydlo RM, et al.: Serial measurement of BCR-ABL transcripts in the peripheral blood after allogeneic stem cell transplantation for chronic myeloid leukemia: an attempt to define patients who may not require further therapy. Blood 107 (10): 4171-6, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Pichert G, Roy DC, Gonin R, et al.: Distinct patterns of minimal residual disease associated with graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for chronic myelogenous leukemia. J Clin Oncol 13 (7): 1704-13, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Shimazu Y, Murata M, Kondo T, et al.: The new generation tyrosine kinase inhibitor improves the survival of chronic myeloid leukemia patients after allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Hematol Oncol 40 (3): 442-456, 2022. [PUBMED Abstract] Saussele S, Lauseker M, Gratwohl A, et al.: Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo SCT) for chronic myeloid leukemia in the imatinib era: evaluation of its impact within a subgroup of the randomized German CML Study IV. Blood 115 (10): 1880-5, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] O'Brien S, Berman E, Moore JO, et al.: NCCN Task Force report: tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy selection in the management of patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia. J Natl Compr Canc Netw 9 (Suppl 2): S1-25, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Wu J, Chen Y, Hageman L, et al.: Late mortality after bone marrow transplant for chronic myelogenous leukemia in the context of prior tyrosine kinase inhibitor exposure: A Blood or Marrow Transplant Survivor Study (BMTSS) report. Cancer 125 (22): 4033-4042, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Bosutinib Allogeneic SCT Current Clinical Trials Treatment options for accelerated-phase chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) include the following: Bosutinib. Allogeneic stem cell  transplant (SCT). The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved bosutinib as a first-line treatment for patients with accelerated-phase CML. These patients were included in the initial phase I/II trial that showed improved efficacy versus imatinib, on the basis of response rates and major molecular response at 5 years of follow-up.[1][Level of evidence C3] Induction of remission using a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) and consideration of an allogeneic SCT for patients with poor responses, when feasible, is a standard  approach for patients with accelerated-phase CML.[2] Evidence (imatinib vs. allogeneic SCT): A cohort study of 132 patients with accelerated-phase CML compared imatinib with allogeneic SCT as first-line therapy, with a median follow-up of 32 months.[2][Level of evidence C1] The overall survival rate was improved using allogeneic SCT for the Sokal high-risk patients (100% vs. 17.7%; P = .008).For Sokal low- and intermediate-risk patients, there were no survival differences between the two first-line approaches. The overall survival rate was improved using allogeneic SCT for the Sokal high-risk patients (100% vs. 17.7%; P = .008). For Sokal low- and intermediate-risk patients, there were no survival differences between the two first-line approaches. Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Gambacorti-Passerini C, Cortes JE, Lipton JH, et al.: Safety and efficacy of second-line bosutinib for chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia over a five-year period: final results of a phase I/II study. Haematologica 103 (8): 1298-1307, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Jiang Q, Xu LP, Liu DH, et al.: Imatinib mesylate versus allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia in the accelerated phase. Blood 117 (11): 3032-40, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] TKIs Allogeneic BMT or SCT Current Clinical Trials Treatment options for blastic-phase chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) include the following: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Allogeneic bone marrow transplant (BMT) or stem cell transplant (SCT). Bosutinib, imatinib mesylate, dasatinib, and nilotinib have demonstrated activity in patients with
myeloid blast crisis  and lymphoid blast crisis or Philadelphia
chromosome–positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia.[1-3] Evidence (TKIs): Two trials of imatinib mesylate and one trial of dasatinib involved a total of 518 patients with blastic-phase CML.[2,4,5][Level of evidence C1] The studies confirmed a hematologic response rate of 42% to 55% and a major cytogenetic response rate of 16% to 25%, but the estimated 2-year survival rate was below 28%. A review of 477 patients with blastic-phase CML treated between 1997 and 2016 at a single center showed that 72% had received previous TKI therapy in chronic phase before transformation.[6][Level of evidence C3]The median overall survival  was 12 months.The median failure-free survival was 5 months.Patients who could complete an allogeneic SCT fared best, but this may have resulted from selection bias. The studies confirmed a hematologic response rate of 42% to 55% and a major cytogenetic response rate of 16% to 25%, but the estimated 2-year survival rate was below 28%. The median overall survival  was 12 months. The median failure-free survival was 5 months. Patients who could complete an allogeneic SCT fared best, but this may have resulted from selection bias. Allogeneic BMT or SCT should be considered when feasible, depending on response and durability of response.[7-11] Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Druker BJ, Sawyers CL, Kantarjian H, et al.: Activity of a specific inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in the blast crisis of chronic myeloid leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia with the Philadelphia chromosome. N Engl J Med 344 (14): 1038-42, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Saglio G, Hochhaus A, Goh YT, et al.: Dasatinib in imatinib-resistant or imatinib-intolerant chronic myeloid leukemia in blast phase after 2 years of follow-up in a phase 3 study: efficacy and tolerability of 140 milligrams once daily and 70 milligrams twice daily. Cancer 116 (16): 3852-61, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Gambacorti-Passerini C, Cortes JE, Lipton JH, et al.: Safety and efficacy of second-line bosutinib for chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia over a five-year period: final results of a phase I/II study. Haematologica 103 (8): 1298-1307, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Kantarjian HM, Cortes J, O'Brien S, et al.: Imatinib mesylate (STI571) therapy for Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia in blast phase. Blood 99 (10): 3547-53, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Sawyers CL, Hochhaus A, Feldman E, et al.: Imatinib induces hematologic and cytogenetic responses in patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia in myeloid blast crisis: results of a phase II study. Blood 99 (10): 3530-9, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Jain P, Kantarjian HM, Ghorab A, et al.: Prognostic factors and survival outcomes in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in blast phase in the tyrosine kinase inhibitor era: Cohort study of 477 patients. Cancer 123 (22): 4391-4402, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Wagner JE, Zahurak M, Piantadosi S, et al.: Bone marrow transplantation of chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase: evaluation of risks and benefits. J Clin Oncol 10 (5): 779-89, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Enright H, Davies SM, DeFor T, et al.: Relapse after non-T-cell-depleted allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for chronic myelogenous leukemia: early transplantation, use of an unrelated donor, and chronic graft-versus-host disease are protective. Blood 88 (2): 714-20, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Goldman JM, Szydlo R, Horowitz MM, et al.: Choice of pretransplant treatment and timing of transplants for chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase. Blood 82 (7): 2235-8, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Clift RA, Appelbaum FR, Thomas ED: Treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia by marrow transplantation. Blood 82 (7): 1954-6, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Hansen JA, Gooley TA, Martin PJ, et al.: Bone marrow transplants from unrelated donors for patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 338 (14): 962-8, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] TKIsPonatinibAsciminib Current Clinical Trials Ponatinib Asciminib Treatment options for relapsed chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) include the following: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).Ponatinib.Asciminib. Ponatinib. Asciminib. Overt treatment failure is defined as a loss of hematologic remission or progression to accelerated-phase or blast crisis-phase CML  as previously defined.  A consistently rising quantitative reverse–transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) BCR::ABL level suggests relapsed disease. Relapsed CML is characterized by any evidence of progression of disease from a stable remission.  This may include the following: Increasing myeloid or blast cells in the peripheral blood or bone marrow. Cytogenetic positivity when previously cytogenetic-negative. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) positivity for BCR::ABL translocation when previously FISH-negative. Detection of the BCR::ABL translocation by RT-PCR during prolonged remissions does not constitute relapse on its own. However, exponential drops in quantitative RT-PCR measurements for 3 to 12 months correlates with the degree of cytogenetic response, just as  exponential rises may be associated with quantitative RT-PCR measurements that are closely connected  with clinical relapse.[1] In case of treatment failure or suboptimal response, patients should undergo BCR::ABL kinase domain mutation analysis to help guide therapy with the newer TKIs or with allogeneic transplant.[2,3] Mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain can confer resistance to imatinib mesylate. Alternative TKIs such as dasatinib, nilotinib, or bosutinib,    higher doses of imatinib mesylate, and allogeneic stem cell transplant (SCT) have been  studied in this setting.[4-16] In particular, the T315I mutation marks resistance to imatinib, dasatinib, nilotinib, and bosutinib. Ponatinib is an oral TKI that has activity in patients with T315I mutations or in patients for whom another TKI failed.[17-19] A dose-ranging phase II study concluded that the optimal response (≤ 1% BCR::ABL) and least toxicity occurred at 45 mg starting dose, with a decrease to 15 mg upon achieving the aforementioned response.[20][Level of evidence C3] Evidence (ponatinib): In a phase II study with 449 patients, the activity of ponatinib was studied.[17][Level of evidence C3] Of the 129 patients with the T315I mutation, 60% had a molecular response to ponatinib. In a retrospective review of 184 patients with recurrent chronic CML and the T315I mutation, the following was reported:[18][Level of evidence C3]Patients treated with ponatinib  had a higher 4-year overall survival (OS) rate than did patients treated with allogeneic SCT (73% vs. 56%; hazard ratio [HR], 0.37; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.16−0.84; P = .017).For patients with accelerated-phase CML, survival was equivalent; however, for patients with blast crisis-phase CML, OS was worse for those who received ponatinib (HR, 2.29; 95% CI, 1.08−4.82; P = .030). In a retrospective review, patients with a T315I mutation and CML that did not respond to ponatinib had a poor prognosis, with a median survival of 16 months. The outcomes for these patients were best after allogeneic SCT, but this could have resulted from selection bias.[21][Level of evidence C3] Of the 129 patients with the T315I mutation, 60% had a molecular response to ponatinib. Patients treated with ponatinib  had a higher 4-year overall survival (OS) rate than did patients treated with allogeneic SCT (73% vs. 56%; hazard ratio [HR], 0.37; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.16−0.84; P = .017). For patients with accelerated-phase CML, survival was equivalent; however, for patients with blast crisis-phase CML, OS was worse for those who received ponatinib (HR, 2.29; 95% CI, 1.08−4.82; P = .030). Asciminib is an allosteric inhibitor of BCR::ABL at the ABL myristoyl pocket, a site unique from those used by TKIs. Evidence (asciminib): An open-label randomized clinical trial compared asciminib with bosutinib. With a median follow-up of 14.9 months, 233 patients with refractory or resistant disease were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive either asciminib or bosutinib.[22]The major molecular response (MMR) rate at week 24 was 25.5% for patients who received asciminib versus 13.2% for patients who received bosutinib. The difference in response (adjusted for major cytogenetic response at baseline) was 12.2% (95% CI, 2.19%–22.30%; P = .029).[22][Level of evidence B3]Grade 3 or 4 adverse events were experienced by 50.6% of patients who received asciminib and 60.5% of patients who received bosutinib. A phase I trial  of asciminib  included heavily pretreated patients who experienced resistance or unacceptable side effects after standard TKIs. Patients with a T315I mutation and those in whom ponatinib failed were included.[23][Level of evidence C3]Of 141 patients, 48% achieved an MMR by 12 months. A phase II trial included 31 patients who received asciminib.[24][Level of evidence C3]An MMR rate of 41% was reported by 12 months.Three of nine patients with disease that failed to respond to previous ponatinib responded to asciminib. The major molecular response (MMR) rate at week 24 was 25.5% for patients who received asciminib versus 13.2% for patients who received bosutinib. The difference in response (adjusted for major cytogenetic response at baseline) was 12.2% (95% CI, 2.19%–22.30%; P = .029).[22][Level of evidence B3] Grade 3 or 4 adverse events were experienced by 50.6% of patients who received asciminib and 60.5% of patients who received bosutinib. Of 141 patients, 48% achieved an MMR by 12 months. An MMR rate of 41% was reported by 12 months. Three of nine patients with disease that failed to respond to previous ponatinib responded to asciminib. Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Martinelli G, Iacobucci I, Rosti G, et al.: Prediction of response to imatinib by prospective quantitation of BCR-ABL transcript in late chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia patients. Ann Oncol 17 (3): 495-502, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Soverini S, Hochhaus A, Nicolini FE, et al.: BCR-ABL kinase domain mutation analysis in chronic myeloid leukemia patients treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors: recommendations from an expert panel on behalf of European LeukemiaNet. Blood 118 (5): 1208-15, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Parker WT, Lawrence RM, Ho M, et al.: Sensitive detection of BCR-ABL1 mutations in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia after imatinib resistance is predictive of outcome during subsequent therapy. J Clin Oncol 29 (32): 4250-9, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Jabbour E, Cortes J, Kantarjian HM, et al.: Allogeneic stem cell transplantation for patients with chronic myeloid leukemia and acute lymphocytic leukemia after Bcr-Abl kinase mutation-related imatinib failure. Blood 108 (4): 1421-3, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] le Coutre PD, Giles FJ, Hochhaus A, et al.: Nilotinib in patients with Ph+ chronic myeloid leukemia in accelerated phase following imatinib resistance or intolerance: 24-month follow-up results. Leukemia 26 (6): 1189-94, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Hochhaus A, Baccarani M, Deininger M, et al.: Dasatinib induces durable cytogenetic responses in patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase with resistance or intolerance to imatinib. Leukemia 22 (6): 1200-6, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Guilhot F, Apperley J, Kim DW, et al.: Dasatinib induces significant hematologic and cytogenetic responses in patients with imatinib-resistant or -intolerant chronic myeloid leukemia in accelerated phase. Blood 109 (10): 4143-50, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Kantarjian HM, Giles FJ, Bhalla KN, et al.: Nilotinib is effective in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in chronic phase after imatinib resistance or intolerance: 24-month follow-up results. Blood 117 (4): 1141-5, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Kantarjian H, Cortes J, Kim DW, et al.: Phase 3 study of dasatinib 140 mg once daily versus 70 mg twice daily in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in accelerated phase resistant or intolerant to imatinib: 15-month median follow-up. Blood 113 (25): 6322-9, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Jabbour E, Jones D, Kantarjian HM, et al.: Long-term outcome of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia treated with second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors after imatinib failure is predicted by the in vitro sensitivity of BCR-ABL kinase domain mutations. Blood 114 (10): 2037-43, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Apperley JF, Cortes JE, Kim DW, et al.: Dasatinib in the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia in accelerated phase after imatinib failure: the START a trial. J Clin Oncol 27 (21): 3472-9, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Hughes T, Saglio G, Branford S, et al.: Impact of baseline BCR-ABL mutations on response to nilotinib in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in chronic phase. J Clin Oncol 27 (25): 4204-10, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Kantarjian H, Pasquini R, Lévy V, et al.: Dasatinib or high-dose imatinib for chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia resistant to imatinib at a dose of 400 to 600 milligrams daily: two-year follow-up of a randomized phase 2 study (START-R). Cancer 115 (18): 4136-47, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Saglio G, Hochhaus A, Goh YT, et al.: Dasatinib in imatinib-resistant or imatinib-intolerant chronic myeloid leukemia in blast phase after 2 years of follow-up in a phase 3 study: efficacy and tolerability of 140 milligrams once daily and 70 milligrams twice daily. Cancer 116 (16): 3852-61, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Cortes JE, Kantarjian HM, Brümmendorf TH, et al.: Safety and efficacy of bosutinib (SKI-606) in chronic phase Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myeloid leukemia patients with resistance or intolerance to imatinib. Blood 118 (17): 4567-76, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Khoury HJ, Cortes JE, Kantarjian HM, et al.: Bosutinib is active in chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia after imatinib and dasatinib and/or nilotinib therapy failure. Blood 119 (15): 3403-12, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Cortes JE, Kim DW, Pinilla-Ibarz J, et al.: A phase 2 trial of ponatinib in Philadelphia chromosome-positive leukemias. N Engl J Med 369 (19): 1783-96, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Nicolini FE, Basak GW, Kim DW, et al.: Overall survival with ponatinib versus allogeneic stem cell transplantation in Philadelphia chromosome-positive leukemias with the T315I mutation. Cancer 123 (15): 2875-2880, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Shacham-Abulafia A, Raanani P, Lavie D, et al.: Real-life Experience With Ponatinib in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia: A Multicenter Observational Study. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk 18 (7): e295-e301, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Cortes J, Apperley J, Lomaia E, et al.: Ponatinib dose-ranging study in chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia: a randomized, open-label phase 2 clinical trial. Blood 138 (21): 2042-2050, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Boddu P, Shah AR, Borthakur G, et al.: Life after ponatinib failure: outcomes of chronic and accelerated phase CML patients who discontinued ponatinib in the salvage setting. Leuk Lymphoma 59 (6): 1312-1322, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Réa D, Mauro MJ, Boquimpani C, et al.: A phase 3, open-label, randomized study of asciminib, a STAMP inhibitor, vs bosutinib in CML after 2 or more prior TKIs. Blood 138 (21): 2031-2041, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Hughes TP, Mauro MJ, Cortes JE, et al.: Asciminib in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia after ABL Kinase Inhibitor Failure. N Engl J Med 381 (24): 2315-2326, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Garcia-Gutiérrez V, Luna A, Alonso-Dominguez JM, et al.: Safety and efficacy of asciminib treatment in chronic myeloid leukemia patients in real-life clinical practice. Blood Cancer J 11 (2): 16, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] These references have been identified by members of the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board as significant in the field of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) treatment.  This list is provided to inform users of important studies that have helped shape the current understanding of and treatment options for CML. Listed after each reference are the sections within this summary where the reference is cited. Hughes TP, Saglio G, Kantarjian HM, et al.: Early molecular response predicts outcomes in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in chronic phase treated with frontline nilotinib or imatinib. Blood 123 (9): 1353-60, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:Treatment of Chronic-Phase CML Jabbour E, Kantarjian HM, Saglio G, et al.: Early response with dasatinib or imatinib in chronic myeloid leukemia: 3-year follow-up from a randomized phase 3 trial (DASISION). Blood 123 (4): 494-500, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:Treatment of Chronic-Phase CML Kantarjian HM, Hochhaus A, Saglio G, et al.: Nilotinib versus imatinib for the treatment of patients with newly diagnosed chronic phase, Philadelphia chromosome-positive, chronic myeloid leukaemia: 24-month minimum follow-up of the phase 3 randomised ENESTnd trial. Lancet Oncol 12 (9): 841-51, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:Treatment of Chronic-Phase CML Cited in: Treatment of Chronic-Phase CML Cited in: Treatment of Chronic-Phase CML Cited in: Treatment of Chronic-Phase CML The PDQ cancer information summaries are reviewed regularly and updated as
new information becomes available.  This section describes the latest
changes made to this summary as of the date above. Treatment Option Overview for Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML) Added Cortes et al. as reference 1. Treatment of Chronic-Phase CML Revised text about the results of a randomized prospective study of 536 patients that compared bosutinib with imatinib (cited Brümmendorf et al. as reference 16). Revised text to state that 50% of patients will experience a relapse of their disease if they discontinue tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy. However, a retrospective analysis with a median follow-up of 36 months found that patients who were in deep molecular response for 5 or more years had a relapse rate of approximately 10% (cited Haddad et al. as reference 23 and level of evidence C3). Added text to state that a withdrawal syndrome of muscle and joint pain has been reported after discontinuing TKI therapy (cited Richter et al. as reference 25). Quality-of-life assessments suggest that there are improvements in social function, diarrhea, and fatigue after stopping TKI therapy (cited Schoenbeck et al. as reference 25 and level of evidence C1). Added text to state that in a retrospective review, patients with relapsed disease after allogeneic transplant who received TKI therapy had a 3-year overall survival rate of 60% (cited Shimazu et al. as reference 40 and level of evidence C1). This summary is written and maintained by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board, which is
editorially independent of NCI.  The summary reflects an independent review of
the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or NIH.  More
information about summary policies and the role of the PDQ Editorial Boards  in
maintaining the PDQ summaries can be found on the About This PDQ Summary and PDQ® Cancer Information for Health Professionals pages. This PDQ cancer information summary for health professionals provides comprehensive, peer-reviewed, evidence-based information about the treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia. It is intended as a resource to inform and assist clinicians in the care of their patients.  It does not provide formal guidelines or recommendations for making health care decisions. This summary is reviewed regularly and updated as necessary by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board, which is editorially independent of the National Cancer Institute (NCI).  The summary reflects an independent review of the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Board members review recently published articles each month to determine whether an article should: be discussed at a meeting, be cited with text, or replace or update an existing article that is already cited. Changes to the summaries are made through a consensus process in which Board members evaluate the strength of the evidence in  the published articles and determine how the article should be included in the summary. The lead reviewers for Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia Treatment are: Aaron Gerds, MD Eric J. Seifter, MD (Johns Hopkins University) Any comments or questions about the summary content should be submitted to Cancer.gov through the NCI website's Email Us. Do not contact the individual Board Members with questions or comments about the summaries. Board members will not respond to individual inquiries. Some of the reference citations in this summary are accompanied by a level-of-evidence designation. These designations are intended to help readers assess the strength of the evidence supporting the use of specific interventions or approaches. The PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board uses a formal evidence ranking system in developing its level-of-evidence designations. PDQ is a registered trademark. Although the content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text, it cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless it is presented in its entirety and is regularly updated. However, an author would be permitted to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks succinctly: [include excerpt from the summary].” The preferred citation for this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Adult Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/leukemia/hp/cml-treatment-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389354] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use within the PDQ summaries only. Permission to use images outside the context of PDQ information must be obtained from the owner(s) and cannot be granted by  the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the illustrations in this summary, along with many other cancer-related images, is available in Visuals Online, a collection of over 2,000 scientific images. Based on the strength of the available evidence, treatment options may be described as either “standard” or “under clinical evaluation.” These classifications should not be used as a basis for insurance reimbursement determinations. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s Email Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Cyclophosphamide - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/cyclophosphamide
txt: This page contains brief information about cyclophosphamide and a collection of links to more information about the use of this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Cyclophosphamide is approved to be used alone or with other drugs to treat: Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in children. Acute monocytic leukemia. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Breast cancer. Chronic granulocytic leukemia. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). Hodgkin lymphoma. It is used in patients with stage III or stage IV disease. Multiple myeloma. Mycosis fungoides (a type of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma) that is advanced. Neuroblastoma that is disseminated. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). It is used in patients with stage III or stage IV NHL, including the following types:Lymphocytic lymphoma (nodular or diffuse).Mixed-cell type lymphoma.Histiocytic lymphoma.Burkitt lymphoma. Ovarian cancer. Retinoblastoma. Lymphocytic lymphoma (nodular or diffuse). Mixed-cell type lymphoma. Histiocytic lymphoma. Burkitt lymphoma. Cyclophosphamide is also being studied in the treatment of other types of cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Cyclophosphamide Injection and Cyclophosphamide Tablet - Lay language summaries of important information about these drugs. MedlinePlus information may include the following: warnings about the drug, what the drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using the drug, what you should know about the drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with the drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Find Clinical Trials for Cyclophosphamide - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: 2019 Alliance PI Meeting - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/nano/events/2019-alliance-pi-meeting
txt: Agenda Principal Investigator's Meeting Book  Poster List  Doug Lowy, M.D., Acting Director, National Cancer Institute  Janet Eary, M.D., Associate Director, Cancer Imaging Program, DCTD, National Cancer Institute  Piotr Grodzinski, Ph.D., Branch Chief, NSDB/CIP/DCTD, National Cancer Institute  James Heath, Ph.D., Institute for Systems Biology Michelle Bradbury, Ph.D, M.D., Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center Omid Farokhzad, M.D., M.B.A., Brigham and Women’s Hospital Phuoc Tran, M.D., Ph.D., Johns Hopkins University Masakazu Kamata, Ph.D., UCLA Wasim Nasser, Ph.D., University of Nebraska Medical Center Gang Han, Ph.D., University of Massachusetts Worchester Miles Miller, Ph.D., Massachusetts General Hospital Jianghong Rao, Ph.D., Stanford University CNTC  Konstantin Sokolov, Ph.D., The University of Texas MD Anderson CNTC  Alexander Stegh, Ph.D., Northwestern University CNTC  Andrew Kummel, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego CNTC  Alexander Kabanov, Ph.D., The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill CNTC  By invitation only. Rm. 2W910 Leaf Huang, Ph.D., University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Sam Achilefu, Ph.D., Washington University in St. Louis Chad Mirkin, Ph.D., Northwestern University Huan Meng, Ph.D., UCLA Shiladitya Sengupta, Ph.D., Brigham and Women’s Hospital Andrew Wang, M.D., University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Andrew Lee, Ph.D., Northwestern University Gregory Lanza, M.D., Ph.D., Washington University in St. Louis Alice Fan, M.D., Stanford University Michelle Bradbury, Ph.D., M.D., Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center Wei Wei, Ph.D., Institute for Systems Biology Mark Grinstaff, Ph.D., Boston University Kit Lam, Ph.D., UC Davis Peixuan Guo, Ph.D., Ohio State Piotr Grodzinski, Ph.D., National Cancer Institute Shan Wang, Ph.D., Stanford University Hsian Rong Tseng, Ph.D., UCLA  Edwin Posadas, M.D., Cedars-Sinai Medical Center  Alexander Kabanov, Ph.D., University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Lily Yang, M.D., Ph.D., Emory University Wenbin Lin, Ph.D., University of Chicago Efstathios Karathanasis, Ph.D., Case Western Reserve University Piotr Grodzinski, Ph.D., National Cancer Institute
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: SDHC epimutant GIST - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2014/sdhcepimutantgist
txt:  Posted:
December 24, 2014  240-760-6600 NCI scientists have identified a key molecular defect that may have important diagnostic implications in a tumor in children known as gastrointestinal stromal tumor, or GIST. Patients with pediatric GIST typically are deficient in the enzyme succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), which is essential for cell metabolism and energy production. Some tumors in patients with pediatric GIST have mutations in one of the four genes that code for SDH (SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD—collectively termed SDHx). However, in some patients with pediatric GIST these genes do not have mutations. Research that appeared online December 24, 2014, in Science Translational Medicine showed that nearly all patients in the study had what is called epimutation of the SDHC gene. The epimutation identified was hypermethylation of the promoter (the controlling element for gene expression) of the SDHC gene, which prevents SDHC gene expression and subsequent expression of the SDHC protein. SDHC epimutation was the only molecular defect found in these children’s tumors; it has not been found in other tumor types and thus appears highly specific to GIST. Knowing about the epimutation may allow physicians to connect it to unique clinical features -- for example, the epimutation may correlate with better or poorer survival. Epimutant GIST, in contrast with SDHx-mutant GIST (no epimutation), does not seem to be heritable. This means that it is unlikely to signal the presence of a family cancer syndrome the way mutations in SDHx genes do. Most importantly, these results provide an immediate refinement of diagnoses thereby allowing clinical researchers to precisely define the tumor risk in this subset of patients and to potentially initiate clinical trials with agents which might reverse the epimutation, noted the investigators. This study was headed by Paul Meltzer, M.D., Ph.D., chief, and Keith Killian, M.D., Ph.D., staff clinician, Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI. The NIH Pediatric GIST clinic was an invaluable and unique resource for the study, since it brought GIST patients together, mostly children, from around the world to be seen by expert clinicians for diagnosis and treatment at the NIH Clinical Center. Due to the rarity of pediatric GIST, the researchers adapted existing genomics methods to routinely process preserved (formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded) tissue samples to maximize the number of patients that could be included in this study.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: WHO Collaborating Center for Global Cancer Control - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/cgh/partnerships-dissemination/who-collaborating-center
txt:  Overview  Impact  How to Connect  Collaborators  Overview Impact How to Connect Collaborators Overview The World Health Organization (WHO) and the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) have designated the Center for Global Health (CGH) as one of their 800+ collaborating centers, and the only one dedicated to global cancer control, to coordinate activities and provide technical advice for WHO’s cancer control goals. Impact The WHO Collaborating Center for Global Cancer Control enables countries to strengthen their health systems for better cancer-specific results. It does this by coordinating experts and events across NCI and WHO to communicate on goals, prioritization, and strategy alignment  providing technical guidance on how to prevent cancer, care for survivors, and form cancer control plans  developing workshops, manuals, analyses, and tools to control cancer and disseminate cancer research  guiding research, strategy, and implementation for WHO’s initiative to eliminate cervical cancer  How to Connect For information, see WHO’s web page on collaborating centers or contact ncicenterforglobalhe@mail.nih.gov. Collaborators Since 2016, CGH has worked directly with WHO’s cancer team in the Geneva headquarters, the PAHO team in Washington, DC, and the WHO regional offices.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Side Effects of Cancer Treatment - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects
txt: Tell your doctor about side effects you are experiencing, so you get the care and treatment you need to manage these problems. Cancer treatments and cancer can cause side effects. Side effects are problems that occur when treatment affects healthy tissues or organs. Speak up about any problems you have. Your health care team can treat and/or talk with you about ways to reduce these side effects, so you feel better. Learn about steps you can take to prevent or manage the side effects listed below: Anemia  Appetite Loss  Bleeding and Bruising (Thrombocytopenia)  Constipation  Delirium  Diarrhea  Edema (Swelling)  Fatigue  Fertility Issues in Boys and Men  Fertility Issues in Girls and Women  Flu-Like Symptoms  Hair Loss (Alopecia)  Infection and Neutropenia  Lymphedema  Memory or Concentration Problems  Mouth and Throat Problems  Nausea and Vomiting  Nerve Problems (Peripheral Neuropathy)  Organ-Related Inflammation and Immunotherapy  Pain  Sexual Health Issues in Men  Sexual Health Issues in Women  Skin and Nail Changes  Sleep Problems  Urinary and Bladder Problems  Keep in mind that side effects vary from person to person, even among people receiving the same type of cancer treatment.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Callan – Childhood Cancer Survivor - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/childhood/childhood-cancer-data-initiative/stories/callan
txt: After enduring intense treatments and a 10-hour surgery as a high school junior to treat a rare form of cancer, Callan currently has no evidence of disease and is a student of fine arts at the University of Texas. Student, University of Texas, Austin  Childhood Cancer Survivor  In October 2021, Callan began experiencing a mysterious pain in his neck. A talented artist and a good student, Callan had been looking forward to his junior year of high school. After also developing a cough, he was diagnosed with walking pneumonia, but later imaging showed a large tumor in his chest. Multiple doctors told Callan the tumor, diagnosed as synovial sarcoma, was inoperable. Synovial sarcoma is often deadly without surgery, but his family eventually found a team willing to operate. Callan currently has no evidence of disease. Callan’s father, Chas, knows few families have time and resources needed to seek different opinions, so he created a Facebook group called “Synovial Sarcoma Families,” which collects and shares data from members about their diagnosis, treatment, outcome, and care teams. “I hope the group helps young people find information and studies that allow them to have agency over their disease,” Callan said.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Smita Bhatia – Pediatric Oncologist - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/childhood/childhood-cancer-data-initiative/stories/smita
txt: Smita believes data sharing is crucial for addressing childhood cancer disparities and improving outcomes. Distinguished Professor in Pediatrics  Director, Institute for Cancer Outcomes and Survivorship  And Gay and Bew White Endowed Chair in Pediatric Oncology, University of Alabama, Birmingham  Identifying and understanding what challenges patients face during care is a driving motivation for Dr. Smita Bhatia’s (she/her) work in childhood cancer. One issue is how often children take their anticancer medication, with lower rates appearing in underrepresented minority groups. In one clinical trial, Smita’s team developed an approach where a child’s doctor texts a reminder about taking a medication to the child and their parent. After the child takes the medication, both child and parent text back confirming the dose taken. The hope is that direct reminders make it easier to adhere to treatment and improve rates at which children across all populations take their medication. Looking ahead, Smita hopes that “increased sharing and access to real-world data,” like the methods, outcomes, and lessons learned from her recent work, “will lead to quicker and more powerful discoveries that can be applied to patient care.”
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: New Grantee Workshop: Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/funding/resources/ngw-faqs
txt: Here are FAQs from the Division of Cancer Biology (DCB) New Grantee Workshop on January 24-25, 2024.  NCI’s Commitment to Diversity, Inclusion, Equity, and anti-Harassment  The NCI Budget and Managing Your New Investigator Grant  Awards to Support Cancer Research Trainees  NIH Funding Opportunities, NCI Researcher Resources, and Workshops  Peer Review  Applying for Renewal Applications  NCI MERIT Award (R37) for Early-Stage Investigators (ESIs)  NCI’s Commitment to Diversity, Inclusion, Equity, and anti-Harassment The NCI Budget and Managing Your New Investigator Grant Awards to Support Cancer Research Trainees NIH Funding Opportunities, NCI Researcher Resources, and Workshops Peer Review Applying for Renewal Applications NCI MERIT Award (R37) for Early-Stage Investigators (ESIs) NCI’s Commitment to Diversity, Inclusion, Equity, and anti-Harassment Where can I find information about NCI efforts focusing on diversity, equity, and inclusion? NCI efforts and initiatives working to promote equity, diversity, and inclusion can be found at the NCI Equity and Inclusion Program website. Individuals can also subscribe to receive email updates about the NCI Equity and Inclusion Program. Are there active funding opportunity announcements (FOAs) related to NCI’s diversity, equity, and inclusion efforts? Yes. Information about FOAs and Requests for Information related to NCI’s diversity, equity, and inclusion efforts can  be found on the NCI Equity and Inclusion Program Funding Opportunities webpage. Where can I find information about the NIH efforts addressing structural racism that may exist within the NIH and throughout the biomedical and behavioral workforce? NIH efforts and initiatives addressing structural racism through the UNITE initiative, including the UNITE Progress Report, Events, and a summary of Milestones and Progress, can be found at the UNITE website. Are diversity, equity, and inclusion being considered in peer review? The Commitment by the NIH Center for Scientific Review (CSR) to Advancing Equity, Diversity and Inclusion in Peer Review can be found in a CSR Review Matters Blog. How can individuals notify NIH about concerns that harassment or other forms of inappropriate conduct are affecting an NIH-funded project? Individuals can inform NIH about harassment or discrimination concerns using this web form or by calling (301) 480-6701. Additional information on what to expect when notifying NIH about harassment can be found at this NIH Extramural Research webpage. Can retaliation related to a harassment investigation be reported to NIH? Yes. NIH recipient institutions are required to notify NIH when individuals identified as Program Director/Principal Investigator or other Senior/Key personnel in an NIH Notice of Award are removed from their position or are otherwise disciplined by the recipient institution due to concerns about retaliation, harassment, bullying, or hostile working conditions. More information can be found in NOT-OD-22-129. Additional FAQs related to NIH anti-harassment policies can be found on the NIH Office of Extramural Research website. The NCI Budget and Managing Your New Investigator Grant How does NCI allocate its budget? Information about how NCI allocates its budget can be found on the NCI Budget and Appropriations webpage. Where can I find information on NCI-funded research like my own? NIH Reporter Matchmaker can be used to find Program Officers/Directors with grant portfolios in your area of research or funded projects that are like yours. A video showing how the tool can be used can be viewed on the NIH Grants YouTube. What are my responsibilities as a Principal Investigator (PI) during the Post-Award Phase? PIs are required to monitor the day-to-day operations of their grant and expenditures through interactions with the administrative officials from their Institute Center (IC). Additional information can be found on the NCI Manage Your Award website section. What budget modifications for an award require prior approval and where do I submit a prior approval request? The NIH Grants Policy Statement provides information for requests that require prior approval, including a summary of actions requiring NIH prior approval. A prior approval request must be submitted via the eRA Commons Prior Approval Module by your Authorized Organization Representative (AOR). Additional information can be found on the NCI Prior Approval Requests webpage. Details about prior approval requests can also be found in the New Grantee Workshop presentation slides on Post-Award Administration. Am I allowed to rebudget my grant? The recipient institution is permitted to rebudget between budget categories within the total costs awarded to meet unanticipated requirements, provided the expenditures: Are within the scope of the approved project  Enhance and do not impede the successful continuation or completion of the project  Are allowable under governing regulations and policies  Some rebudgeting actions may require specific prior approval from the NCI. The NIH Grants Policy Statement and the terms of the award should be consulted regarding current policies on rebudgeting and prior approval authority. The grants management specialist assigned to the project may also be contacted for advice. What details should be included in a Research Performance Progress Report (RPPR), and when should it be submitted? RPPRs for R01 awards subject to the Streamlined Noncompeting Award Process (SNAP) are due the 15th of the month preceding the month when the budget period ends. Fellowship and non-SNAP award progress reports are due 2 months before the beginning of the next budget period. Details about what should be included can be found in the New Grantee Workshop presentation slides on Communicating with Your NCI Program Director: It's a Two Way Street. Where can I find the most up-to-date information on the Program Officer/Director or Grants Management Specialist assigned to my  award? The contact information can be found in eRA Commons. Should I reach out to my Program Officer/Director when my research is going well? Yes. You can reach out to your Program Officer/Director to share good news related to your research and laboratory. Does my grant have carryover authority? Most grants have automatic carryover authority, and recipients do not have to request approval from the NCI to carryover funds from one budget period to the next. The Notice of Award (NoA) indicates if your grant has automatic carryover authorized. How do I make a carryover request since my grant does not have automatic carryover authority? The NIH eRA Commons Prior Approval module is available for electronic submission of a carryover request. The Prior Approval module includes the ability for the request to be routed within the institution for Principal Investigator input and submission by the Authorized Organization Representative (AOR). The system automatically tracks all requests for the institution and notifies the assigned NCI staff that a request has been submitted. Additional information can be found at the NCI Carryover Unobligated Funds webpage. If I move to a different institution, can I transfer my grant there? NIH prior approval is required for the transfer of the legal and administrative responsibility for a grant-supported project or activity from one legal entity to another before the expiration of the approved project period (period of performance). Additional information can be found at the NCI Transfer of a Grant webpage. Awards to Support Cancer Research Trainees Where can I find funding opportunities to support cancer research trainees? The NCI Center for Cancer Training website has information about funding for research training. Are there career development awards that are available to non-U.S. citizens? K99/R00 awards are available to non-U.S. citizens who must be working at a U.S. institution during the duration of the award. I am confused about avoiding scientific overlap of a student’s F31 or F99 to my R01. If there is no research funding, won’t the work have to be within the scope of my funded R01? The F31 and F99 Research Training Plans should be developed in collaboration between the sponsor and the fellowship candidate. The fellowship project can be within the overall scope of the active sponsor’s research awards. However, NCI expects the fellowship candidate to make significant intellectual contributions to the project and write the Research Training Plan. There should be no text duplication or substantial duplication of the scientific aims, and the candidate ’s application should propose a scientific research question or approach that is distinct from the specific aims of the sponsor’s pending or active research grants. Can you carryover unobligated funds from the K99 phase to the R00 phase of the award? With K99/R00 awards issued by NCI, unobligated funds may not be carried over from the K99 to the R00 phase. What are the success rates of applications for NCI career development awards? The success rates for NCI career development awards can be found in New Grantee Workshop presentation slides on Awards to Support Trainees. Where can I find information about NCI Diversity Supplements, including eligibility and application requirements? The NCI Diversity Supplements Guidelines provide information about the application process and highlight NCI-specific requirements. Does a Principal Investigator (PI) need to have at least two 2 years left on the award or be 2 years into the award to be eligible for a diversity supplement? To be eligible for a diversity supplement, a PI must have at least 2 years remaining on the award. Additional information about eligibility and requirements for Research Supplements to Promote Diversity in Health-Related Research can be found in PA-23-189. Is there a limit to the number of diversity supplements that a grant can support? R01/R01-equivalent grants can support up to a maximum of two Diversity Supplement candidates. R21/R21-equivalent grants can support a maximum of one Diversity Supplement candidate whose career level is graduate student or more junior. NIH Funding Opportunities, NCI Researcher Resources, and Workshops How can I apply for funding through NIH Common Fund programs? Current NIH Common Fund Funding Opportunities can be found at the NIH Common Fund website (and are also published in the NIH Guide). Where can I learn about DCB’s Notices of Funding Opportunities (NOFOs)? You can get information about DCB NOFOs on the DCB Funding Opportunities webpage. Recent funding opportunities supported by DCB are also shared on the DCB Twitter account (@NCICancerBio) and in the News from DCB email. Where can I get information on the latest NIH Guide announcements (e.g., PAs, RFAs, and Notices)? The NIH Guide LISTSERV sends a Weekly NIH Funding Opportunities and Notices e-mail. What are some considerations, especially for new grantees, related to Program Project applications? Information about NCI Program Project applications can be found in PAR-23-059. What are considerations when deciding whether to apply for an R01, an R21, or an R03 grant? An NIAID article discusses some considerations when applying for an R01, R21, or an R03. Does NCI solicit R21 applications through an NIH Parent Announcement? No. NCI does not participate in the NIH parent announcements for R21 applications. Can a new/early-stage investigator apply for a U01? Yes. New and early-stage investigators can apply for U01s. It is recommended that researchers reach out to the scientific/research contact listed in the U01 funding opportunity to discuss the specific requirements of the U01. Why and when should I apply for an administrative supplement? Administrative supplements provide additional funding to a current grant to meet increased costs that are within the scope of the approved project, but that were unforeseen when the new or competing renewal application was awarded (e.g., COVID-19 related loses, increased animal costs). A request for supplemental funding should be submitted before the original grant expires. Where can I find NIH funding opportunities for administrative supplements? Active administrative supplements can be found  in the NIH Guide. What are some of the cancer research resources available through NCI and can they be used by those who are not funded by NCI? Most of the resources found in the NCI Resources for Researchers directory are available to all researchers. Additional NCI tools, databases, and resources are described in the New Grantee Workshop presentation slides on DCB/NCI Resources for Researchers. Are any NCI (including DCB) workshops open to the public? Many NCI workshops and events (including DCB activities) that are open to the public can be found at the NCI Events website. DCB upcoming events, which are usually open to the public, can be found on the DCB News webpage. Peer Review How are conflicts of interest (COI) addressed during the grant peer review process? NIH Scientific Review Officers (SROs) work to identify and manage NIH peer reviewer COIs. Guidelines for the process can be found on the Managing Conflict of Interest in NIH Peer Review of Grants and Contracts webpage. Do reviewers have access to all documentation associated with a previously funded grant submitted for renewal? No. Grant application reviewers only have access to documentation included with the renewal submission and the summary statement associated with the previous  iteration. How can I get experience as a NIH grant reviewer? Individuals who have not held an R01 or R01-equivalent grant can gain review experience through the Early Career Reviewer (ECR) program. Additional information on the reviewer selection process can be found on a Center for Scientific Review (CSR) webpage. Is scientific overlap permitted between a currently funded project and a new grant submission by the same investigator? NIH does not allow scientific overlap in two or more applications or awards, regardless of the funding source. More information can be found in NOT-OD-18-197. Why was the grant that I submitted put in a different study section than the one that I requested? The Center for Scientific Review (CSR) assigns applications to review groups based on the fit between published guidelines for review groups and your application. In assessing fit, they typically consider the abstract, specific aims, broader goals, and methods used. Assignment to a review group also takes into consideration conflicts of interest between key personnel on an application and members of a review group. Your suggestions made via the Assignment Request Form can help CSR staff consider the full range of factors. They designed the review groups to have some overlap, so more than one might have the expertise to review your application. CSR scientific staff make the final assignment after they carefully consider your suggestions and explanations in light of NIH policies. Additional information about the assignment of grant applications to scientific review groups can be found at the CSR website. Applying for Renewal Applications When my project ends, should I renew my grant or apply with a new application? Considerations about submitting a renewal or a new grant application can be found in New Grantee Workshop Presentation slides on Review, Resubmission, and Renewals. Additional information about renewals can be found at a NIAID webpage. Can I renew a grant funded under a now-expired Funding Opportunity Announcement (FOA)? You can submit a renewal application to a different FOA, such as a Parent Announcement (for unsolicited or investigator-initiated applications). Consult your Program Director for further information. What is the success rate of new applications vs. renewal applications (for R01-equivalent grants)? In 2022, the success rate of new applications (Type 1) submitted to NIH was about 20% and the success rate of renewal applications (Type 2) was about 42%. Additional information can be found in the NIH Data Book. Is there a limit to the direct cost budget I can request for a renewal application? Yes. No more than a 10% increase over the budget awarded for the last year of the prior project period (the last Type 5) may be requested. The policy applies to all Type 2 R01, U01 and P01 renewal applications regardless of the amount of the budget request or the budget format (modular or non-modular). Additional information can be found in FAQs regarding the NCI budget cap. NCI MERIT Award (R37) for Early-Stage Investigators (ESIs) What is the mechanism for “converting” an R01 to a MERIT Award (R37)? Is it automatically initiated by the NCI based on the grants score? Early-Stage Investigator (ESI) R01 applications that receive a score within the NCI payline for experienced and new investigators are eligible for consideration to be “automatically” converted by NCI to an ESI MERIT Award (R37) if all PIs have ESI status at the time of award. Additional information can be found at the NCI MERIT Award webpage. Where can I find information on the MERIT Award (R37) Extension Process, including what will need to be included in the request? Information and FAQs related to the R37 extension process can be found at the NCI MERIT Award (R37) Extension Process webpage. When do I need to submit a MERIT Award (R37) Extension Request? MERIT Award Extension requests are due during the penultimate award year, either on March 1, July 1, or November 1 (based on the deadline table). The due date for the extension request is also listed in the Notice of Award. Can I request additional funding in a MERIT Award (R37) Extension? The budget (modular or categorical as appropriate) that can be requested with your MERIT Award Extension will be indicated on the penultimate year Notice of Award.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Leucovorin Calcium - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/leucovorincalcium
txt: Leucovorin calcium is a type of drug called a folic acid analog, which means it is similar to the vitamin folic acid. It is used in combination with certain chemotherapy drugs to enhance their ability to kill cancer cells (for example, fluorouracil) or to lessen their harmful side effects (for example, methotrexate). FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Leucovorin calcium is approved to be used alone or with other drugs to treat: Colorectal cancer. It is used with fluorouracil as palliative treatment in patients with advanced disease. Anemia. It is used to treat megaloblastic anemia that occurs when the body does not get enough of a vitamin called folic acid. It is used by patients who cannot take the vitamin by mouth. Leucovorin calcium is also used to prevent and treat the toxic effects of high-dose methotrexate when used to treat osteosarcoma and other types of cancer. It is also used to treat overdoses of methotrexate or other folic acid antagonists. The drug is also being studied in the treatment of other conditions and types of cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Leucovorin Calcium Injection and Oral Leucovorin Calcium - Lay language summaries of important information about these drugs. MedlinePlus information may include the following: warnings about the drug, what the drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using the drug, what you should know about the drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with the drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Find Clinical Trials for Leucovorin Calcium - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Childhood Cancer Data Initiative Vision - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/childhood/childhood-cancer-data-initiative-0
txt: Childhood Cancer Data Initiative Vision The Childhood Cancer Data Initiative (CCDI) is building a community centered around childhood cancer care and research data. Advocates and researchers within the pediatric cancer community discuss the CCDI and share its importance, goals and potential outcomes for treating children and AYAs with cancer.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Premature death rates diverge in the United States - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2017/premature-death-rates-diverge
txt:  Posted:
January 25, 2017  240-760-6600 Premature death rates have declined in the United States among Hispanics, blacks, and Asian/Pacific Islanders (APIs)—in line with trends in Canada and the United Kingdom—but increased among whites and American Indian/Alaska Natives (AI/ANs), according to a comprehensive study of premature death rates for the entire U.S. population from 1999 to 2014. This divergence was reported by researchers at the National Cancer Institute (NCI), and colleagues at the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), both part of the National Institutes of Health, and the University of New Mexico College of Nursing. The findings appeared January 25, 2017, in The Lancet. Declining rates of premature death (i.e., deaths among 25- to 64-year-olds) among Hispanics, blacks, and APIs were due mainly to fewer deaths from cancer, heart disease, and HIV over the time period of the study. The decline reflects successes in public health efforts to reduce tobacco use and medical advances to improve diagnosis and treatment. Whites also experienced fewer premature deaths from cancer and, for most ages, fewer deaths from heart disease over the study period. Despite these substantial improvements, overall premature death rates still remained higher for black men and women than for whites. In contrast, overall premature death rates for whites and AI/ANs were driven up by dramatic increases in deaths from accidents (primarily drug overdoses), as well as suicide and liver disease. Among 25- to 30-year-old whites and AI/ANs, the investigators observed increases in death rates as high as 2 percent to 5 percent per year, comparable to those increases observed at the height of the U.S. AIDS epidemic. “The results of our study suggest that, in addition to continued efforts against cancer, heart disease, and HIV, there is an urgent need for aggressive actions targeting emerging causes of death, namely drug overdoses, suicide, and liver disease,” said Meredith Shiels, Ph.D., M.H.S., Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics (DCEG), NCI, and lead author of the study. “Death at any age is devastating for those left behind, but premature death is especially so, in particular for children and parents,” emphasized Amy Berrington, D.Phil., also of DCEG and senior author of the study. “We focused on premature deaths because, as Sir Richard Doll, the eminent epidemiologist and my mentor, observed: ‘Death in old age is inevitable, but death before old age is not.’ Our study can be used to target prevention and surveillance efforts to help those groups in greatest need.” The study findings were based on death certificate data collected by the National Center for Health Statistics, part of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. About the National Cancer Institute (NCI): NCI leads the National Cancer Program and the NIH’s efforts to dramatically reduce the prevalence of cancer and improve the lives of cancer patients and their families, through research into prevention and cancer biology, the development of new interventions, and the training and mentoring of new researchers. For more information about cancer, please visit the NCI website at cancer.gov or call NCI's Cancer Information Service at 1-800-4-CANCER. About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit nih.gov.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Prostate Cancer Treatment - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/prostate/patient/prostate-treatment-pdq
txt:  General Information About Prostate Cancer  Stages of Prostate Cancer  Treatment Option Overview  Treatment of Stage I Prostate Cancer  Treatment of Stage II Prostate Cancer  Treatment of Stage III Prostate Cancer  Treatment of Stage IV Prostate Cancer  Treatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer  To Learn More About Prostate Cancer  About This PDQ Summary  Prostate cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells
		  form in the tissues of the prostate. Signs of prostate cancer include a weak flow of urine
		  or frequent urination. Tests that examine the prostate and blood are used to diagnose prostate cancer. A biopsy is done to diagnose prostate cancer and find out the grade of the cancer (Gleason score). Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prostate is a
		  gland in the male
		  reproductive system. It lies just
		  below the bladder (the organ that
		  collects and empties urine) and in
		  front of the rectum (the lower part
		  of the intestine). It is about the
		  size of a walnut and surrounds part of the urethra (the tube that empties urine from the
		  bladder). The prostate gland makes fluid that is part of the semen.EnlargeAnatomy of the  male reproductive and urinary systems showing the ureters, bladder, prostate gland, urethra, penis, testicles, and other organs. Prostate cancer is most common in older men. In the U.S., about 1 out of 8 men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by prostate cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the  following: Trouble starting the flow of urine. Frequent urination (especially at night). Trouble emptying the bladder completely. Weak or interrupted ("stop-and-go") flow of urine. When prostate cancer is detected in an advanced stage, symptoms may include: Pain in the back, hips, or
			 pelvis that doesn't go away. Shortness of breath, feeling very tired, fast heartbeat, dizziness, or pale skin caused by anemia. Other conditions may cause the same symptoms. As men age, the prostate may get bigger and block the
		  urethra or bladder. This may cause trouble urinating  or sexual problems. The condition is called benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), and although
		  it is not cancer, surgery may be
		  needed. The symptoms
		  of benign prostatic hyperplasia or of other problems in the prostate may be
		  like symptoms of prostate cancer. The following tests and procedures may be used: Physical exam and health history: An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patient’s health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. Digital rectal
			 exam (DRE): An exam of the rectum.  The doctor or nurse inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into the rectum and feels the prostate through the rectal wall for lumps or abnormal areas. EnlargeDigital rectal exam (DRE). The doctor inserts a gloved, lubricated finger into the rectum and feels the rectum, anus, and prostate (in males) to check for anything abnormal. Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test: A test that measures the level of PSA in the blood.  PSA is a substance made by the prostate that may be found in higher than normal amounts in the blood of men who have prostate cancer.  PSA levels may also be high in men who have an infection or inflammation of the prostate or BPH (an enlarged, but noncancerous, prostate). PSMA PET scan: An imaging procedure that is used to help find prostate cancer cells that have spread outside of the prostate, into bone, lymph nodes, or other organs. For this procedure, a cell-targeting molecule linked to a radioactive substance is injected into the body and travels through the blood. It attaches to a protein called prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) that is found on the surface of prostate cancer cells. A PET scanner detects high concentrations of the radioactive molecule and shows where the prostate cancer cells are in the body. A PSMA PET scan may be used to help diagnose prostate cancer that may have come back or spread to other parts of the body. It may also be used to help plan treatment. Transrectal
			 ultrasound: A procedure in which a probe that is about the size of a finger is inserted into the rectum to check the prostate.  The probe is used to bounce high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) off internal tissues or organs and make echoes.  The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram.  Transrectal ultrasound may be used during a biopsy procedure. This is called transrectal ultrasound guided biopsy.EnlargeTransrectal ultrasound. An ultrasound probe is inserted into the rectum  to check the prostate.  The probe bounces sound waves off body tissues to  make echoes that  form a sonogram (computer picture) of the prostate. Transrectal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): A procedure that uses a strong magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. A probe that gives off radio waves is inserted into the rectum near the prostate. This helps the MRI machine make clearer pictures of the prostate and nearby tissue. A transrectal MRI is done to find out if the cancer has spread outside the prostate into nearby tissues. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). Transrectal MRI may be used during a biopsy procedure. This is called transrectal MRI guided biopsy. A transrectal biopsy is used to diagnose prostate cancer. A transrectal biopsy is the removal of tissue from the prostate by inserting a thin needle through the rectum and into the prostate. This procedure may be done using transrectal ultrasound or transrectal MRI to help guide where samples of tissue are taken from. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. EnlargeTransrectal biopsy. An ultrasound probe is inserted into the rectum to show where the tumor is. Then a needle is inserted through the rectum into the prostate to remove tissue from the prostate. Sometimes a biopsy is done using a sample of tissue that was removed during a transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia. If  cancer is found, the pathologist will give the cancer a grade. The grade of the cancer describes how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope and how quickly the cancer is likely to grow and spread. The grade of the cancer is called the Gleason score. To give the cancer a grade, the pathologist checks the prostate tissue samples to see how much the tumor tissue is like the normal prostate tissue and to find the two main cell patterns. The primary pattern describes the most common tissue pattern, and the secondary pattern describes the next most common pattern. Each pattern is given a grade from 3 to 5, with grade 3 looking the most like normal prostate tissue and grade 5 looking the most abnormal. The two grades are then added to get a Gleason score. The Gleason score can range from 6 to 10. The higher the Gleason score, the more likely the cancer will grow and spread quickly. A Gleason score of 6 is a low-grade cancer; a score of 7 is a medium-grade cancer; and a score of 8, 9, or 10 is a high-grade cancer. For example, if the most common tissue pattern is grade 3 and the secondary pattern is grade 4, it means that most of the cancer is grade 3 and less of the cancer is grade 4. The grades are added for a Gleason score of 7, and it is a medium-grade cancer. The Gleason score may be written as 3+4=7, Gleason 7/10, or combined Gleason score of 7. The prognosis and treatment options depend on the following: The stage of the cancer (level of PSA, Gleason score, Grade Group, how much of the prostate is affected by the cancer, and whether the cancer has spread to other places in the
		  body). The patient’s age. Whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back). Treatment options also may depend on the following: Whether the patient has other health problems. The expected side effects of treatment. Past treatment for prostate cancer. The wishes of the patient. Most men diagnosed with prostate cancer do not die of it. After prostate cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to
		  find out if cancer cells have spread within the prostate or to other parts of
		  the body. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. The Grade Group and PSA level are used to stage prostate cancer. The following stages are used for prostate cancer:Stage IStage IIStage IIIStage IV Prostate cancer may recur (come back) after it has been treated. Stage I Stage II Stage III Stage IV The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the
		  prostate or to other parts of the
		  body is called staging. The information gathered from the
		  staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is
		  important to know the stage  in order to plan treatment. The results of the tests used to diagnose prostate cancer are often also used to stage the disease. (See the General Information section.) In prostate cancer, staging tests may not be done unless the patient has symptoms or signs that the cancer has spread, such as bone pain, a high PSA level, or a high Gleason score. The following tests and procedures also may be used in the staging process: Bone
			 scan: A procedure to check if there are rapidly dividing cells, such as cancer cells, in the bone.  A very small amount of radioactive material is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream.  The radioactive material collects in the bones with cancer and is detected by a scanner.
			 EnlargeBone scan. A small amount of radioactive material is injected into the patient's bloodstream and collects in abnormal cells in the bones. As the patient lies on a table that slides under the scanner, the radioactive material is detected and images are made on a computer screen or film. MRI (magnetic
		  resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). CT scan (CAT scan):
		  A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles.  The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.  This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. Pelvic lymphadenectomy:
			 A surgical procedure to remove the lymph nodes in the pelvis.  A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. Seminal vesicle biopsy: The removal of fluid from the seminal vesicles (glands that make semen) using a needle.  A pathologist views the fluid under a microscope to look for cancer cells. ProstaScint scan: A procedure to check for cancer that has spread from the prostate to other parts of the body, such as the lymph nodes.  A very small amount of radioactive material is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream.  The radioactive material attaches to prostate cancer cells and is detected by a scanner. The radioactive material shows up as a bright spot on the picture in areas where there are a lot of prostate cancer cells. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if  prostate cancer spreads to the bone, the cancer cells in the bone are actually prostate cancer cells. The disease is metastatic prostate cancer, not bone cancer. Denosumab, a monoclonal antibody, may be used to prevent bone metastases. The stage of the cancer is based on the results of the staging and diagnostic tests, including the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test and the Grade Group. The tissue samples removed during the biopsy are used to find out the Gleason score. The Gleason score ranges from 2 to 10 and describes how different the cancer cells look from normal cells under a microscope and how likely it is that the tumor will spread. The lower the number, the more cancer cells look like normal cells and are likely to grow and spread slowly. The Grade Group depends on the Gleason score. See the  General Information section for more information about the Gleason score. Grade Group 1 is a Gleason score of 6 or less. Grade Group 2 or 3 is a Gleason score of 7. Grade Group 4 is a Gleason score 8. Grade Group 5 is a Gleason score of 9 or 10. The PSA test measures the level of PSA in the blood. PSA is a substance made by the prostate that may be found in an increased amount in the blood of men who have prostate cancer. In stage I, cancer is
			 found in the prostate only. The cancer: is not felt during a digital rectal exam and is found by needle biopsy (done for a high PSA level) or in a sample of tissue removed during surgery for other reasons (such as benign prostatic hyperplasia). The PSA level is lower than 10 and the Grade Group is 1; or is felt during a digital rectal exam and is found in one-half or less of one side of the prostate. The PSA level is lower than 10 and the Grade Group is 1. In stage II, cancer is
			 more advanced than in stage I, but has not spread outside the prostate. Stage II is divided into stages IIA, IIB, and IIC. In stage IIA, cancer: is found in one-half or less of one side of the prostate. The PSA level is at least 10 but lower than 20 and the Grade Group is 1; or is found in more than one-half of one side of the prostate or in both sides of the prostate. The PSA level is lower than 20 and the Grade Group is 1. In stage IIB, cancer: is found in one or both sides of the prostate. The PSA level is lower than 20 and the Grade Group is 2. In stage IIC, cancer: is found in one or both sides of the prostate. The PSA level is lower than 20 and the Grade Group is 3 or 4. Stage III is divided into stages IIIA, IIIB, and IIIC. In stage IIIA, cancer: is found in one or both sides of the prostate. The PSA level is at least 20 and the Grade Group is 1, 2, 3, or 4. In stage IIIB, cancer: has spread from the prostate to the seminal vesicles or to nearby tissue or organs, such as the rectum, bladder, or pelvic wall. The PSA can be any level and the Grade Group is 1, 2, 3, or 4. In stage IIIC, cancer: is found in one or both sides of the prostate and may have spread to the seminal vesicles or to nearby tissue or organs, such as the rectum, bladder, or pelvic wall. The PSA can be any level and the Grade Group is 5. Stage IV is divided into stages IVA and IVB. In stage IVA, cancer: is found in one or both sides of the prostate and may have spread to the seminal vesicles or to nearby tissue or organs, such as the rectum, bladder, or pelvic wall. Cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes. The PSA can be any level and the Grade Group is 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5. In stage IVB, cancer: has spread to other parts of the body, such as the bones or distant lymph nodes. Prostate cancer often spreads to the bones. The cancer may come back in the prostate or
		in other parts of the body. There are different types of treatment for patients with prostate cancer. Eight types of standard treatment are used:Watchful waiting
			 or active surveillanceSurgery Radiation therapy and radiopharmaceutical therapy
			 Hormone therapyChemotherapyTargeted therapyImmunotherapyBisphosphonate therapy There are treatments for bone pain caused by bone metastases or hormone therapy. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical
		  trials.CryosurgeryHigh-intensity–focused ultrasound therapyProton beam radiation therapyPhotodynamic therapy Treatment for prostate cancer may cause side effects. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Follow-up tests may be needed. Watchful waiting
			 or active surveillance Surgery Radiation therapy and radiopharmaceutical therapy Hormone therapy Chemotherapy Targeted therapy Immunotherapy Bisphosphonate therapy Cryosurgery High-intensity–focused ultrasound therapy Proton beam radiation therapy Photodynamic therapy Different types of treatment are available for patients with
		  prostate cancer. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some
		  are being tested in clinical trials.
		   A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help
		  improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients
		  with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the
		  standard treatment, the new
		  treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Watchful waiting and active surveillance are treatments used for older men who do not have signs or symptoms or have other medical conditions and for men whose prostate cancer is found during a screening test. Watchful waiting is closely monitoring a patient’s condition without giving any treatment until signs or symptoms appear or change. Treatment is given to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life. Active surveillance is closely following a patient's condition without giving any treatment unless there are changes in test results. It is used to find early signs that the condition is getting worse. In active surveillance, patients are given certain exams and tests, including digital rectal exam, PSA test, transrectal ultrasound, and transrectal needle biopsy, to check if the cancer is growing. When the cancer begins to grow, treatment is given to cure the cancer. Other terms that are used to describe not giving treatment to cure prostate cancer right after diagnosis are observation, watch and wait, and expectant management. Patients in good health  whose tumor is in the prostate gland only may be treated with surgery to remove the tumor. The following types of surgery are used: Radical
				prostatectomy: A surgical procedure to remove the prostate, surrounding tissue, and seminal vesicles. Removal of nearby lymph nodes may be done at the same time. The main types of radical prostatectomy include: 
				Open radical prostatectomy: An incision (cut) is made in the retropubic area (lower abdomen) or the perineum (the area between the anus and scrotum). Surgery is performed through the incision. It is harder for the surgeon to spare the nerves near the prostate or to remove nearby lymph nodes with the perineum approach.Radical laparoscopic prostatectomy: Several small incisions (cuts) are made in the wall of the abdomen. A laparoscope (a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and lens for viewing) is inserted through one opening to guide the surgery. Surgical instruments are inserted through the other openings to do the surgery.Robot-assisted laparoscopic radical prostatectomy: Several small cuts are made in the wall of the abdomen, as in regular laparoscopic prostatectomy. The surgeon inserts an instrument with a camera through one of the openings and surgical instruments through the other openings using robotic arms. The camera gives the surgeon a 3-dimensional view of the prostate and surrounding structures. The surgeon uses the robotic arms to do the surgery while sitting at  a computer monitor near the operating table.EnlargeTwo types of radical prostatectomy. In a retropubic prostatectomy,  the prostate is removed through an incision in the wall of  the abdomen.  In a perineal prostatectomy, the prostate is removed through an incision in the area between the scrotum and the anus. Pelvic lymphadenectomy: A surgical procedure to remove the lymph nodes in the pelvis.  A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. If the lymph nodes contain cancer,
				the doctor will not remove the prostate and may recommend other
				treatment. Transurethral resection of the
				prostate (TURP): A surgical procedure to remove tissue from the prostate using a resectoscope (a thin, lighted tube with a cutting tool) inserted through the urethra.  This procedure is done to treat benign prostatic hypertrophy and it is sometimes done to relieve symptoms caused by a tumor before other cancer treatment is given. TURP may
				also be done in men whose tumor is in the prostate only and who cannot have a radical prostatectomy.EnlargeTransurethral resection of the prostate (TURP).  Tissue is removed from the prostate  using a resectoscope (a thin, lighted tube with a cutting tool at the end)  inserted through the urethra. Prostate tissue that is blocking the urethra is cut away and removed through the resectoscope. Open radical prostatectomy: An incision (cut) is made in the retropubic area (lower abdomen) or the perineum (the area between the anus and scrotum). Surgery is performed through the incision. It is harder for the surgeon to spare the nerves near the prostate or to remove nearby lymph nodes with the perineum approach. Radical laparoscopic prostatectomy: Several small incisions (cuts) are made in the wall of the abdomen. A laparoscope (a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and lens for viewing) is inserted through one opening to guide the surgery. Surgical instruments are inserted through the other openings to do the surgery. Robot-assisted laparoscopic radical prostatectomy: Several small cuts are made in the wall of the abdomen, as in regular laparoscopic prostatectomy. The surgeon inserts an instrument with a camera through one of the openings and surgical instruments through the other openings using robotic arms. The camera gives the surgeon a 3-dimensional view of the prostate and surrounding structures. The surgeon uses the robotic arms to do the surgery while sitting at  a computer monitor near the operating table. In some cases, the nerves that control penile erection can be saved with nerve-sparing surgery.  However, this may not be possible in men with
			 large tumors or tumors that are very close to the nerves. Possible problems after prostate cancer surgery include the following: Impotence. Leakage of urine from the bladder or stool from the rectum. Shortening of the penis (1 to 2 centimeters). The exact  reason for this is not known. Inguinal hernia (bulging  of fat or part of the small intestine  through  weak muscles into the groin). Inguinal hernia may occur more often in men treated with  radical prostatectomy than in  men who have some other types of prostate surgery, radiation therapy, or  prostate biopsy alone. It is most likely to  occur within the first 2 years after radical prostatectomy. Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing.  There are different types of radiation therapy: External radiation therapy  uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the area of the body with cancer. Conformal radiation is a type of external radiation therapy that uses a computer to make a 3-dimensional (3-D) picture of the tumor and shapes the radiation beams to fit the tumor. This allows a high dose of radiation to reach the tumor and causes less damage to nearby healthy tissue.Hypofractionated radiation therapy may be given because it has a more convenient treatment schedule. Hypofractionated radiation therapy is radiation treatment in which a larger than usual total dose of radiation is given once a day over a shorter period of time (fewer days) compared to standard radiation therapy. Hypofractionated radiation therapy may have worse side effects than standard radiation therapy, depending on the schedules used. Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. In early-stage prostate cancer, the radioactive seeds are placed in the prostate  using needles that are inserted through the skin between the scrotum and rectum. The placement of the radioactive seeds in the prostate is guided by images from transrectal ultrasound or computed tomography (CT). The needles are removed after the radioactive seeds are placed in the prostate. Radiopharmaceutical therapy  uses a radioactive substance to treat cancer. Radiopharmaceutical therapy includes the following:Alpha emitter radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance to treat prostate cancer that has spread to the bone. A radioactive substance called radium-223 is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream. The radium-223 collects in areas of bone with cancer and kills the cancer cells. Hypofractionated radiation therapy may be given because it has a more convenient treatment schedule. Hypofractionated radiation therapy is radiation treatment in which a larger than usual total dose of radiation is given once a day over a shorter period of time (fewer days) compared to standard radiation therapy. Hypofractionated radiation therapy may have worse side effects than standard radiation therapy, depending on the schedules used. Alpha emitter radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance to treat prostate cancer that has spread to the bone. A radioactive substance called radium-223 is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream. The radium-223 collects in areas of bone with cancer and kills the cancer cells. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy, internal radiation therapy, and radiopharmaceutical therapy are used to treat prostate cancer. Men treated with radiation therapy for prostate cancer have an increased risk of having bladder and/or gastrointestinal cancer. Radiation therapy can cause impotence and urinary problems that may get worse with age. Hormone therapy is a cancer treatment that removes hormones or blocks their action and stops cancer cells from growing.  Hormones are substances made by glands in the body and circulated in the bloodstream.   In prostate cancer, male sex hormones can cause prostate cancer to grow. 
Drugs, surgery, or other hormones are used to reduce the amount of male hormones or block them from working. This is called androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). Hormone therapy for prostate cancer may
			 include the following: Abiraterone acetate can prevent prostate cancer cells from making androgens.  It is used in men with advanced prostate cancer that has not gotten better with other hormone therapy. It is also used in men with high-risk prostate cancer that has improved with treatments that lower hormone levels. Orchiectomy is
				a surgical procedure to remove one or both testicles, the main source of male hormones, such as testosterone, to decrease
				the amount of hormone being made. Estrogens
				(hormones that promote female sex characteristics) can prevent the
				testicles from making
				testosterone. However, estrogens are seldom used today in the treatment of
				prostate cancer because of the risk of serious side effects. Luteinizing hormone-releasing
				hormone agonists can stop the testicles from making
				testosterone. Examples are leuprolide, goserelin, and buserelin. Antiandrogens
				can block the action of androgens
				(hormones that promote male sex characteristics), such as testosterone. Examples are
				flutamide,  bicalutamide, enzalutamide, apalutamide,      nilutamide, and darolutamide. Drugs that can prevent the adrenal glands from making androgens include
				ketoconazole, aminoglutethimide, hydrocortisone, and progesterone. Hot flashes, impaired sexual function, loss of desire for sex, and weakened bones
			 may occur in men treated with hormone therapy.  Other side effects include diarrhea, nausea, and itching. See Drugs Approved for Prostate Cancer for more information. Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing.  When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). See Drugs Approved for Prostate Cancer for more information. Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells. Targeted therapies usually cause less harm to normal cells than chemotherapy or radiation therapy do. PARP inhibitors block an enzyme involved in many cell functions, including the repair of DNA damage. Blocking this enzyme may help keep cancer cells from repairing their damaged DNA, causing them to die. Olaparib is a PARP inhibitor used to treat patients with prostate cancer  that has spread to other parts of the body and has mutations in certain genes, such as   BRCA1 or BRCA2. Immunotherapy is a treatment that uses the patient’s immune system to fight cancer.  Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the body’s natural defenses against cancer. This cancer treatment is a type of biologic therapy.  Sipuleucel-T is a type of immunotherapy used to treat prostate cancer that has metastasized (spread to other parts of the body). See Drugs Approved for Prostate Cancer for more information. Bisphosphonate drugs, such as clodronate or zoledronate,  reduce bone disease when cancer has spread to the bone. Men who are treated with antiandrogen therapy or orchiectomy are at an increased risk of bone loss. In these men, bisphosphonate drugs lessen the risk of bone fracture (breaks). The use of bisphosphonate drugs to prevent or  slow the growth of bone metastases is being studied in clinical trials. Prostate cancer that has spread to the bone and certain types of hormone therapy can weaken bones and lead to bone pain. Treatments for bone pain include the following: Pain medicine. External radiation therapy. Strontium-89 (a radioisotope). Targeted therapy with a monoclonal antibody, such as denosumab. Bisphosphonate therapy. Corticosteroids. See the PDQ summary on Pain for more information. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Cryosurgery is a treatment that uses an instrument to freeze and destroy prostate cancer cells. Ultrasound is used to find the area that will be treated. This type of treatment is also called cryotherapy. Cryosurgery can cause impotence and leakage of urine from the bladder or stool from the rectum. High-intensity–focused ultrasound therapy   is a treatment that uses ultrasound (high-energy sound waves) to destroy cancer cells.  To treat prostate cancer, an endorectal probe is used to make the sound waves. Proton beam radiation therapy is a type of high-energy, external radiation therapy that uses  streams of protons (tiny particles with a positive charge) to kill tumor cells. This type of treatment can lower the amount of radiation damage to healthy tissue near a tumor. A cancer treatment that uses a drug and a certain type of laser light to kill cancer cells. A drug that is not active until it is exposed to light is injected into a vein. The drug collects more in cancer cells than in normal cells. Fiberoptic tubes are then used to carry the laser light to the cancer cells, where the drug becomes active and kills the cells. Photodynamic therapy causes little damage to healthy tissue. It is used mainly to treat tumors on or just under the skin or in the lining of internal organs. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, visit our Side Effects page. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer  treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first  to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. As you go through treatment, you  will have follow-up tests or checkups. Some tests that were done to diagnose or stage the cancer may be repeated to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Standard treatment of stage I prostate
		  cancer may include the following: Watchful
			 waiting. Active surveillance. If the cancer begins to grow, hormone
			 therapy may be given. Radical
			 prostatectomy, usually with pelvic lymphadenectomy. Radiation therapy may be given after
			 surgery. External radiation therapy. Hormone therapy may be given after radiation therapy. Internal radiation therapy with radioactive seeds. A clinical trial of high-intensity–focused ultrasound therapy. A clinical trial of photodynamic therapy. A clinical trial of cryosurgery. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Standard treatment of stage II prostate
		  cancer may include the following: Watchful waiting. Active surveillance. If the cancer begins to grow, hormone
			 therapy may be given. Radical prostatectomy,  usually with pelvic lymphadenectomy. 
			  Radiation therapy may be given after surgery. External radiation therapy. Hormone therapy may be given after radiation therapy. Internal radiation therapy with radioactive seeds. A clinical trial of cryosurgery. A clinical trial of high-intensity–focused ultrasound therapy. A clinical trial of proton beam radiation therapy. A clinical trial of photodynamic therapy. Clinical trials of new types of treatment, such as  hormone therapy followed by radical prostatectomy. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Standard treatment of stage III prostate
		  cancer may include the following: External radiation therapy. Hormone
			 therapy may be given after radiation therapy. Hormone therapy. Radiation therapy may be given after hormone therapy. Radical prostatectomy.
			  Radiation therapy may be given after surgery. Watchful waiting. Active surveillance. If the cancer begins to grow, hormone
			 therapy may be given. Treatment to control cancer that is in the prostate and lessen urinary symptoms may include the following: External radiation therapy. Internal radiation therapy with radioactive seeds. Hormone therapy. Transurethral resection of the
			 prostate (TURP). A clinical trial of new types of radiation therapy. A clinical trial of cryosurgery. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Standard treatment of stage IV prostate
		  cancer may include the following: Hormone therapy. Hormone therapy combined with chemotherapy. Bisphosphonate therapy. External radiation therapy. Hormone therapy may be given after radiation therapy. Alpha emitter radiation therapy. Watchful waiting. Active surveillance. If the cancer begins to grow, hormone
			 therapy may be given. A clinical trial of radical prostatectomy with
			 orchiectomy. Treatment to control cancer that is in the prostate and lessen urinary symptoms may include the following: Transurethral resection of the
			 prostate (TURP). Radiation therapy. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Standard treatment of recurrent
		or hormone-resistant prostate cancer may include the following: Hormone
		  therapy. Chemotherapy for patients already treated with hormone therapy. Biologic therapy with  sipuleucel-T for patients already treated with hormone therapy. External radiation therapy. Prostatectomy for
		  patients already treated with radiation therapy. Alpha emitter radiation therapy. PARP inhibitor therapy for patients already treated with hormone therapy who have mutations in certain genes, such as BRCA1 or BRCA2. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For more information from the National Cancer Institute about  prostate cancer, see the following: Prostate Cancer Home Page Prostate Cancer, Nutrition, and Dietary Supplements Prostate Cancer Prevention Prostate Cancer Screening Drugs Approved for Prostate Cancer Prostate-Specific Antigen (PSA) Test Hormone Therapy for Prostate Cancer Targeted Cancer Therapies Immunotherapy to Treat Cancer Treatment Choices for Men with Early-Stage Prostate Cancer Cryosurgery to Treat Cancer For general cancer information and other resources from the National Cancer Institute, visit: About Cancer Staging Chemotherapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Radiation Therapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Coping with Cancer Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer For Survivors and Caregivers Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish. PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the treatment of prostate cancer.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board. A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Adult Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Prostate Cancer Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/prostate/patient/prostate-treatment-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389353] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online. Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Oncology Product Research and Review for Postdoctoral Research Fellows - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/grants-training/training/at-nci/iotf/postdoc-research-fellows
txt: This fellowship will train postdocs in the aspects of research and review of medical product development process to facilitate the movement of drugs, biologics, and devices from the bench to the bedside. Fellows will receive formal training and mentoring in the relevant federal statutes, regulations, principles, and practices of FDA medical product review, including issues related to product development, e.g., manufacturing processes, production, purification, characterization, testing, quality control, and quality assurance, understanding the biology, chemistry, pharmacoepidemiology, manufacturing, postmarketing surveillance, and mechanism of action/pathogenesis of disease. *Selection of fellows will be dependent upon the availability of funds. Understanding of cancer biology relevant to molecular targeted therapy  Understanding of regulatory requirements for product development and approval process and participation in the review of regulatory files (e.g. IND, NDA, BLA, 510k, PMA) for chemistry, manufacturing control, pharmacology/toxicology and clinical trial design  Participation in the development of product standards and guidance document development  Understanding of critical ethical issues and requirements in product research, development, and review, including protection of human research subjects and conflict of interest  Understanding the manufacturing processes, e.g., production, purification, characterization, testing, quality control, and quality assurance  Participation in and understanding of product-related research, i.e. understanding the biology, chemistry, pharmacoepidemiology, manufacturing, post-marketing surveillance, and mechanism of action/pathogenesis of disease  Ph.D., M.D., or M.D./Ph.D.  Must have at least one year of postdoctoral training experience  Must be within 5 years of the applicants most advanced degree  Must U.S. citizenship or permanent residents, who has resided in the US for a total of three of the past five years  For current NCI postdocs: Fellows finishing their fourth or fifth year may qualify for a sixth year CRTA extension  Proof of COVID-19 vaccination  NOTE: In order to be approved for logistical and physical access to NIH facilities and systems, candidates must be able to pass a Federal background check  using Standard Form-85 (read-SF-85).  Section 14 of the Form asks, "in the last year, have you used, possessed, supplied, or manufactured illegal drugs?" The questions pertain to the illegal use of drugs or controlled substances in accordance with Federal laws, even though permissible under state laws.  Federal laws supersede all state laws. The program time frame will be for up to two years and include up to six fellows per year. Fellows will choose one of the product or clinical divisions in FDA Centers for supplemental training. In a particular product division, these fellows will be matched to a pre-screened pool of principal investigators or to a branch chief for regulatory research and regulatory experience. Fellows with a Ph.D. degree will be matched to a product division or pharmacology/toxicology branch in a clinical division. Fellows will have the option to perform translational research in the participating division or office. These fellows will undertake and participate in various training activities of the chosen division. The division director or their designee will oversee these activities. Fellows will spend approximately 40% of their time in training to become proficient in the process of product or pharmacology/toxicology reviews; and policy and guidance document development. Fellows will also participate in branch, lab, division and office meetings, grand rounds, and regulatory presentations offered at the participating Center. They will also participate in regulatory meetings with investigators and sponsors. Fellows are expected to conduct research activities under the guidance of principal investigators in ongoing projects in the lab. These fellows will have option to choose their principal investigator at the beginning of program. During the training program, fellows will be expected to attend and take and pass required tests in reviewer training and various courses offered by participating FDA Centers. The first-year curricula and activities may be continued in the second year of the program based on the fellow's performance evaluated by PI, branch chief, division director and associate directors of research at both institutions. Applications open on May 1st, 2023 and will close on June 5th, 2023, for a September 1st start date. The letters of reference deadline is June 9th, 2023. Please submit the following materials to the IOTF Program Manager at IOTFfellowship@nih.gov: Curriculum Vitae  Personal statement of research goals  Three letters of reference  For more detailed information and application guidelines view the NCI-FDA Research and Regulatory Review Fellowships Guidelines for Application(PDF) While at FDA, fellows will each be assigned a mentor who will be a senior member of FDA scientific review staff. Review list of mentors and projects here. Burden Statement OMB No.: 0925-0761
Expiration Date: 07/31/2025 Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 60 minutes per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing he collection of information. An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a collection of information unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden to: NIH, Project Clearance Branch, 6705 Rockledge Drive, MSC 7974, Bethesda, MD 20892-7974, ATTN: PRA (0925-0761). Do not return the completed form to this address.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Freedom of Information Act - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/policies/foia
txt: The FOIA, 5 U.S.C. 552, provides individuals with a right to access to records in the possession of the Federal government. The government may withhold information pursuant to the nine exemptions and three exclusions contained in the Act. If you have questions regarding FOIA requests pending with NCI or questions specific to NCI records, please contact Suzy Milliard, NCI FOIA and Privacy Act Coordinator, by phone (240-781-3340) or email (ncifoia@mail.nih.gov). More Information about the types of information you can request through FOIA, or to submit a FOIA Request with NIH, visit the National Institutes of Health FOIA Page. The NCI FOIA Office is located at: Building 31, Room 10A48
31 Center Drive
Bethesda, MD 20892
Telephone: 240-781-3340
Fax number: 240-541-4519 The NIH FOIA Office is located at: Building 31, Room 5B35
31 Center Drive
Bethesda, MD 20892
Telephone: 301-496-5633
Fax number: 301-402-4541
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Futibatinib - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/futibatinib
txt: This page contains brief information about futibatinib
         and a collection of links to more information about the use of 
         this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available here. Futibatinib
         is approved to treat:  Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (cancer that forms in the bile ducts inside the liver) that has spread or cannot be removed with surgery. It is used in adults whose cancer has been treated and has an FGFR2 gene fusion or other change in the structure of the FGFR2 gene.  Futibatinib is approved under FDA’s Accelerated Approval Program. As a condition of approval, confirmatory trial(s) must show that it provides a clinical benefit in these patients. Futibatinib
         is also being studied in the treatment of other types of
         cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Futibatinib - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Targeted Cancer Therapies Find Clinical Trials for Futibatinib - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: CRCHD Integrated Networks - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/crchd/inp
txt: Through NCI-supported networks, CRCHD strategically enhances the integration and dissemination of diversity training, women’s health, and sexual and gender minority efforts across NCI, the scientific community, and underserved communities experiencing disparities. By creating linkages across the country, CRCHD is able to more efficiently identify and leverage opportunities within NCI-supported and other programs to address unmet needs in cancer and cancer health disparities research. CRCHD currently supports Connecting Underrepresented Populations to Clinical Trials (CUSP2CT) Program, Screen to Save: NCI Colorectal Cancer Outreach and Screening Initiative (Screen to Save), and Transformative Educational Advancement and Mentoring Network. CUSP2CT will implement and evaluate multilevel and culturally tailored outreach and education interventions with the primary goal of increasing referral and ultimately, accrual of underrepresented racial/ethnic (R/E) minority populations, to NCI-supported clinical trials (CTs).Learn more about CUSP2CT. The Screen to Save: NCI Colorectal Cancer Outreach and Screening Initiative aims to increase colorectal cancer screening rates among ethnically and racially diverse and rural communities nationwide.Learn more about Screen to Save The TEAM Network will pilot test the use of training champions (TCs) at Minority-Serving Institutions to support the development of educational activities and scientific career development programs and promote the diversity of the cancer research workforce.Learn more about TEAM
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Tocilizumab - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/tocilizumab
txt: This page contains brief information about tocilizumab and a collection of links to more information about the use of 
         this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Tocilizumab
         is approved to treat:  Cytokine release syndrome (CRS) that is severe or life-threatening.  It is used in adults and children aged 2 years and older who have CRS caused by  chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy.  Tocilizumab
         is also being studied in the treatment of other conditions. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Tocilizumab - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Monoclonal Antibodies CAR T Cells: Engineering Patients’ Immune Cells to Treat Their Cancers Find Clinical Trials for Tocilizumab - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: TMIST Breast Screening Study - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/breast/research/tmist-trial
txt: TMIST will help researchers learn about the best ways to find breast cancer in women who have no symptoms. TMIST (Tomosynthesis Mammographic Imaging Screening Trial) is a research study that will help researchers learn about the best way to find breast cancer in women who have no symptoms. It is a randomized breast cancer screening study that compares two types of Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved digital mammograms for their ability to reduce advanced breast cancer: standard digital mammograms (2-D) and a newer technology called tomosynthesis mammograms (3-D). 2-D mammograms take pictures from two sides of the breast to create a flat image. 3-D mammogram images are taken from different angles around the breast and then built into a 3-D-like image. The goal of breast cancer screening is to find life-threatening breast cancer early, when it may be easier to treat, and reduce the chance that someone will die from it. Researchers are doing this trial because they do not know if 3-D are better than 2-D mammograms for breast cancer screening.  Who can enroll in TMIST?  How do I enroll in TMIST?  What happens once I enroll in TMIST?  How will people be followed after taking part in TMIST?  What are the goals of TMIST?  What happens if I am diagnosed with breast cancer while taking part in TMIST?  Are there costs to taking part in TMIST?  TMIST Collaborators  Who can enroll in TMIST? How do I enroll in TMIST? What happens once I enroll in TMIST? How will people be followed after taking part in TMIST? What are the goals of TMIST? What happens if I am diagnosed with breast cancer while taking part in TMIST? Are there costs to taking part in TMIST? TMIST Collaborators Who can enroll in TMIST? People aged 45 to 74 who are planning to get a routine screening mammogram are eligible for this trial. You can also contact a site that is taking part to ask about joining the study. Open sites are listed in the Locations & Contacts section of the TMIST summary page. How do I enroll in TMIST? When you schedule a routine mammogram, you may be asked if you would like to take part in TMIST. The trial is taking place in mammogram clinics around the United States, with a few sites in Argentina, Canada, Italy, Korea, and Peru. Over 100 clinics are taking part in the trial. Researchers plan to enroll nearly 129,000 people. What happens once I enroll in TMIST? TMIST will last for 5 years. Once enrolled, you will be randomly assigned by a computer to have either a 3-D or 2-D screening mammogram. You will have that kind of mammogram every year or every other year for 5 years. How often you have a mammogram during these 5 years will be based on your age  breast density  family history of breast cancer  presence of genetic changes known to cause breast cancer  use of hormone replacement therapy  menopausal status  How often you have a mammogram during the 5 years of the study may change if your risk changes.  Risk changes might include new genetic testing findings, changes in family history, or changes in hormone replacement therapy use. During the study, the results of every mammogram from every participant will be collected. Information will also be recorded about any medical follow-up tests, such as more imaging or a biopsy, breast cancer diagnoses, treatment, and how people responded to treatment. How will people be followed after taking part in TMIST? After you complete 5 years on the study receiving the type of mammogram that was assigned, the research team will follow you for another 3 years. During the 3-year follow-up period you can get either type of mammogram. What are the goals of TMIST? Even though some 3-D mammogram machines are FDA approved, no one knows if 3-D mammograms are better than 2-D at finding life-threatening breast cancers early enough that they can be treated successfully. Therefore, the main goal of TMIST is to compare 2-D mammograms with 3-D mammograms to see which one is better at reducing advanced breast cancer. If one type of mammogram is better at finding life-threatening breast cancers early, then fewer people screened with that type of mammogram should go on to develop advanced breast cancer. The researchers are also looking at whether 3-D mammograms might help certain groups of women. Questions they are trying to answer include Among the women who receive 3-D mammograms, will fewer advanced cancers be diagnosed in certain groups, such as
	women with dense breasts
different  racial and ethnic groups
premenopausal women
women who are taking hormone replacement therapy  Will there be fewer false-positive test results in the entire study group or among certain groups?  Is there a link between certain findings on mammograms and development of the most aggressive breast cancers?  Are some types of cancers more common between recommended screening intervals?  women with dense breasts  different  racial and ethnic groups  premenopausal women  women who are taking hormone replacement therapy  Another important aspect of the trial is to build a tissue bank for future research. Everyone who joins the trial will be asked to submit tissue samples, such as blood and swabs of cells from inside their mouths. Researchers hope that the information from these tissue samples will help personalize the way we screen for breast cancer in the future by taking a person’s genetics and other personal risk factors into account. What happens if I am diagnosed with breast cancer while taking part in TMIST? If you have a mammogram while taking part in TMIST that leads to a biopsy, the tissue collected from that biopsy will be analyzed as part of the study. Studying this tissue, whether it is benign, precancer, or cancer, will help researchers learn more about the biology of breast cancers that are found through mammograms. If the biopsy shows that you have breast cancer, you will be treated for your cancer just as you would if you were not part of TMIST. Although treatment for breast cancer is not provided as part of the study, the study team will collect information on all the tests, procedures, and treatments used to diagnose and treat the cancer. Procedures and treatments that you might have include imaging, biopsies, surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy. See our page about Breast Cancer Treatment for more information. Are there costs to taking part in TMIST? Your health insurance will be billed for the cost of the mammogram during your time on the study. Some health plans do not cover the complete cost of a 3-D mammogram. So, if you are randomly assigned to receive 3-D mammograms and your plan will not cover the complete cost, you may need to pay for the portion that the health plan will not cover. This is the same as if you were not part of the study. You will not be paid to take part in this study. TMIST Collaborators TMIST is supported by NCI and is coordinated by the ECOG-ACRIN Cancer Research Group.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Vaccine Reduces HPV Infections in Young Men - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/anal/research/quad-hpv-vaccine-men
txt: An international randomized clinical trial has shown that the vaccine Gardasil, which arms the immune system against four strains of the human papillomavirus (HPV), can reduce the incidence of anogenital HPV infections in young men 16 to 26 years of age at the time of vaccination. The results were published in the New England Journal of Medicine on February 3, 2011. Gardasil was first approved by the FDA in 2006 for females 9 to 26 years of age to prevent cervical, vulvar, and vaginal cancers, as well as genital warts. Two of the four strains targeted by the vaccine—HPV-6 and HPV-11—cause most cases of genital warts, and the other two strains—HPV-16 and HPV-18—cause about 70 percent of all cervical cancers. In addition, HPV-16 and HPV-18 have been linked to cancers of the anus, penis, and oropharynx. In 2009, the FDA extended approval of the vaccine for the prevention of genital warts in young men based on the results of the current trial. The trial, designed by Merck Pharmaceuticals, enrolled 4,065 young men from 18 countries; 2,032 of the participants were randomly assigned to receive the three-dose vaccine over a 6-month period, and 2,033 received a series of placebo injections over the same period of time. Anna R. Giuliano, Ph.D., of the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute and her colleagues measured HPV infection status at the time participants joined the study and again periodically for up to 3 years after enrollment. The men also underwent regular physical examinations to identify genital skin lesions associated with HPV. The researchers performed analyses in two overlapping groups of men. The intention-to-treat cohort included men who all received at least one dose of vaccine or placebo, regardless of HPV status at enrollment. The per-protocol cohort included only men who received all three doses and tested negative for all four HPV types targeted by the vaccine throughout the vaccination phase of the study, and thus excluded men who developed infections before the vaccination was complete. Gardasil is designed to prevent HPV infections and does not appear to increase the rate of clearance of established infections; thus, the estimates of effectiveness will be higher in the per-protocol cohort than in the intention-to-treat cohort. In the intention-to-treat cohort, the vaccine prevented 65.5 percent of skin lesions, mostly genital warts, associated with two of the four targeted HPV types; in the per-protocol population containing men with no evidence of previous exposure to the viruses, the vaccine prevented 83.8 percent of lesions. The rate of persistent HPV infection with any of the four types anywhere in the body that lasted at least 6 months was reduced by 47.8 percent in the intention-to-treat cohort and by 85.6 percent in the per-protocol cohort. For HPV types 16 and 18—the two that can eventually cause cancer in a small proportion of infected individuals—persistent infection was reduced by 79 percent and 96 percent, respectively, in the per-protocol cohort, though these data are based on very small numbers of people. Much longer follow up and additional studies will be needed to determine whether the vaccine prevents the development of HPV-related cancers in men, explained the authors. On December 22, 2010, the FDA approved Gardasil for both men and women ages 9 through 26 to prevent anal cancer and associated precancerous lesions. This approval was based on results in the subset of men in the current trial who have sex with other men. Dr. Giuliano and her colleagues found a 78 percent reduction in anal intraepithelial neoplasia grades 1, 2, and 3 related to HPV-16 and HPV-18 infection. Approximately 90 percent of anal cancers have been linked to HPV infection.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Contact OGA - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/oga/about/contact
txt: Please direct any questions or issues related to a specific grant to the grants management specialist listed on your Notice of Award. Find grants management contacts For general comments, concerns, and questions regarding NCI grant-related issues or the web content for OGA, please use the contact information below. Your feedback allows us to better identify customer needs and priorities as well as assess how we are currently serving you. National Cancer Institute Office of Grants Administration 9609 Medical Center Drive West Tower, 2nd floor Rockville MD 20850 Phone (240) 276-6300 Email: NCIOGA
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Questions to Ask About Support - Rare Brain & Spine Tumor Network - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/rare-brain-spine-tumor/living/questions/support
txt: NIH Clinical Center Social Worker Sylvia Stearn provides supportive counseling and resources to help patients with brain and spine tumors cope and transition to their new normal. Your health care team can help you understand the supportive services and resources available to you and your family or care partner. Here are some suggested questions to ask your doctor. Where can I get more information about my brain or spine tumor?  What supportive services are available to me and my family or caregiver?  Can I return to work now or in the future?  If I can return to work with restrictions or in a part-time capacity, what services are available to help me?  How do I talk to my employer about my diagnosis?  Should I talk to my employer’s human resources department about available support resources?  How do I talk to my family and friends about my diagnosis?  How do I maintain healthy relationships with my family, friends, and co-workers?  What supportive services or resources are available to help me and my family manage our emotions, feelings, and mental health?  Will I need assistive equipment or supervision at home during my treatment or recovery?  Are there financial support services available to me?  Are there travel support services (such as hotels and transportation) available to me and my family or caregiver?  Are there counseling services, therapy services, or support groups available to me and my family or caregiver as part of my care?  Are there services available to help with my spiritual or religious needs during care?  Are there services available to help with my cultural needs during care?  Should I contact legal services to prepare documents, such as a living will or power of attorney?  If I am nearing end of life, what services are available to help me and my family or caregiver?  We encourage you to print these questions and bring them with you to your appointment.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Drugs Approved for Colon and Rectal Cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/colorectal
txt: This page lists cancer drugs approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for colon and rectal cancer. The list includes generic and brand names. This page also lists common drug combinations used in colon and rectal cancer. The individual drugs in the combinations are FDA-approved. However, the drug combinations themselves usually are not approved, although they are widely used. The drug names link to NCI's Cancer Drug Information summaries. There may be drugs used in colon cancer and rectal cancer that are not listed here. Alymsys (Bevacizumab)  Avastin (Bevacizumab)  Bevacizumab  Camptosar (Irinotecan Hydrochloride)  Capecitabine  Cetuximab  Cyramza (Ramucirumab)  Eloxatin (Oxaliplatin)  Erbitux (Cetuximab)  5-FU (Fluorouracil Injection)  Fluorouracil Injection  Fruquintinib  Fruzaqla (Fruquintinib)  Ipilimumab  Irinotecan Hydrochloride  Keytruda (Pembrolizumab)  Leucovorin Calcium  Lonsurf (Trifluridine and Tipiracil Hydrochloride)  Mvasi (Bevacizumab)  Nivolumab  Opdivo (Nivolumab)  Oxaliplatin  Panitumumab  Pembrolizumab  Ramucirumab  Regorafenib  Stivarga (Regorafenib)  Trifluridine and Tipiracil Hydrochloride  Tucatinib  Tukysa (Tucatinib)  Vectibix (Panitumumab)  Xeloda (Capecitabine)  Yervoy (Ipilimumab)  Zaltrap (Ziv-Aflibercept)  Zirabev (Bevacizumab)  Ziv-Aflibercept  CAPOX  FOLFIRI  FOLFIRI-BEVACIZUMAB  FOLFIRI-CETUXIMAB  FOLFOX  FU-LV  XELIRI  XELOX  Alymsys (Bevacizumab)  Avastin (Bevacizumab)  Bevacizumab  Camptosar (Irinotecan Hydrochloride)  Capecitabine  Cetuximab  Cyramza (Ramucirumab)  Eloxatin (Oxaliplatin)  Erbitux (Cetuximab)  5-FU (Fluorouracil Injection)  Fluorouracil Injection  Fruquintinib  Fruzaqla (Fruquintinib)  Ipilimumab  Irinotecan Hydrochloride  Keytruda (Pembrolizumab)  Leucovorin Calcium  Lonsurf (Trifluridine and Tipiracil Hydrochloride)  Mvasi (Bevacizumab)  Nivolumab  Opdivo (Nivolumab)  Oxaliplatin  Panitumumab  Pembrolizumab  Ramucirumab  Regorafenib  Stivarga (Regorafenib)  Trifluridine and Tipiracil Hydrochloride  Tucatinib  Tukysa (Tucatinib)  Vectibix (Panitumumab)  Xeloda (Capecitabine)  Yervoy (Ipilimumab)  Zaltrap (Ziv-Aflibercept)  Zirabev (Bevacizumab)  Ziv-Aflibercept  CAPOX  FOLFIRI  FOLFIRI-BEVACIZUMAB  FOLFIRI-CETUXIMAB  FOLFOX  FU-LV  XELIRI  XELOX  Afinitor (Everolimus)  Everolimus  Lanreotide Acetate  Somatuline Depot (Lanreotide Acetate) 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Epcoritamab-bysp - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/epcoritamab-bysp
txt: Epcoritamab-bysp works by bringing healthy T cells (immune cells that help kill cancer cells) and lymphoma cells close together so the T cells can more effectively kill the lymphoma cells. It does this by binding to a protein called CD3 on healthy T cells and a protein called CD20 on B cells (the immune cells that are cancerous in B-cell lymphomas). Epcoritamab-bysp is a type of targeted therapy drug called a bispecific T-cell engager (BiTE). FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Epcoritamab-bysp
         is approved to treat adults with:  Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) or high-grade B-cell lymphoma that has relapsed (come back) or did not get better after at least two other systemic therapies.  Epcoritamab-bysp
         is approved under FDA’s Accelerated Approval Program. As a condition of approval, confirmatory trial(s) must show that it provides a clinical benefit in these patients. Epcoritamab-bysp
         is also being studied in the treatment of other types of
         cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Epcoritamab-bysp - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Trial Confirms CAR T-Cell Therapy Benefits People with Aggressive Lymphomas Targeted Therapy to Treat Cancer Monoclonal Antibodies Find Clinical Trials for Epcoritamab-bysp - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: 1,3-Butadiene - Cancer-Causing Substances - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/substances/butadiene
txt: 1,3-Butadiene is used to produce synthetic rubber products, such as tires. 1,3-Butadiene is a colorless gas at room temperature with a gasoline-like odor. It is used to produce synthetic rubber products, such as tires, resins, and plastics, and other chemicals. Exposure to 1,3-butadiene mainly occurs among workers who breath contaminated air on the job. Other sources of exposure include automobile exhaust; tobacco smoke; and polluted air and water near chemical, plastic, or rubber facilities. Studies have consistently shown an association between occupational exposure to 1,3-butadiene and an increased incidence of leukemia. The U.S. Occupational Safety & Health Administration has information on exposure limits for 1,3-butadiene. People can also reduce their exposure to 1,3-butadiene by avoiding tobacco smoke. Health Effects Notebook for Hazardous Air Pollutants. 1,3-Butadiene Fact Sheet. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2009. Available online. Last accessed January 31, 2019.  International Agency for Research on Cancer. 1,3 Butadiene, IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, Volume 97. Lyon, France: World Health Organization, 2012. Also available online. Last accessed January 31, 2019.  National Toxicology Program. 1,3 Butadiene, Report on Carcinogens, Fifteenth Edition. Triangle Park, NC: National Institute of Environmental Health and Safety, 2021. Also available online. Last accessed December 5, 2022.  Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 1,3-Butadiene, Safety and Health Topics. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Labor. Available online. Last accessed January 31, 2019. 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Liver (Hepatocellular) Cancer Screening (PDQ®) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/liver/hp/liver-screening-pdq
txt:  Summary of Evidence  Significance  Evidence of Benefit  Evidence of Harms  Latest Updates to This Summary (03/06/2024)  About This PDQ Summary  Benefits Harms Note: The Summary of Evidence section summarizes the published evidence on this topic. The rest of the summary describes the evidence in more detail. Other PDQ summaries on Primary Liver Cancer Treatment and
Childhood Liver Cancer Treatment are also available. Based on fair evidence,  screening of persons at elevated risk does not result in a decrease in mortality from hepatocellular cancer. Magnitude of Effect: No reduction in mortality. Study Design: Randomized controlled trials. Internal Validity: Fair. Consistency: Multiple studies, large number of participants. External Validity: Fair. Based on fair evidence, screening would result in rare but serious side effects associated with needle aspiration cytology such as needle-track seeding, particularly of lesions more than 2 cm in diameter, and hemorrhage, bile peritonitis, and pneumothorax.  Transjugular liver biopsy is rarely associated with major complications such as perforation of the hepatic capsule or cholangitis. Magnitude of Effect: Good evidence for uncommon but serious harms. Study Design: Randomized controlled trials and observational studies. Internal Validity: Fair. Consistency: Multiple studies, large number of participants. External Validity: Good. Incidence, Mortality, and Risk Factors In 2020, liver cancer was the sixth most common cancer and third leading cause of cancer death in the world.[1]  In the United States, it is estimated that
there will be 41,630 new cases diagnosed in 2024 and 29,840 deaths due to this disease.[2] There is a
distinct male preponderance among all ethnic groups in the United States.[3] Chronic hepatitis B and C are recognized as the major
factors worldwide increasing the risk of HCC, with   risk being greater in the
presence of coinfection with hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus.[4-6]  The
incidence of HCC in individuals with chronic hepatitis is as high as 0.46% per
year.  In the United States, chronic hepatitis B and C account for about 30% to
40% of HCC.  Chronic hepatitis G infection is not associated with HCC in either
hepatitis B surface antigen–positive carriers or noncarriers.[7] Cirrhosis is also a risk factor for HCC, irrespective of the etiology of the
cirrhosis.  The annual risk of developing HCC among persons with cirrhosis is
between 1% and 6%.[5]  Other risk factors include alcoholic cirrhosis,
hemochromatosis, alpha-l-antitrypsin deficiency, glycogen storage disease,
porphyria cutanea tarda, tyrosinemia, and Wilson disease,[8] but rarely
biliary cirrhosis.[9]  A retrospective case-control study found that features suggestive of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, including obesity, type 2 diabetes, dyslipidemia, and insulin resistance, were more frequently observed in patients with HCC associated with cryptogenic cirrhosis than in those with HCC of viral or alcohol etiology.[10,11] Aflatoxins,  which are  mycotoxins formed by certain   Aspergillus  species, are
a frequent contaminant of improperly stored grains and nuts.  In parts of
Africa, the high incidence of HCC in humans may be related to ingestion of
foods contaminated with aflatoxins.   This association, however, is blurred by the
frequent coexistence of hepatitis B infection in those population groups.   The likely etiology of HCC is summarized in the following table.[12] Sung H, Ferlay J, Siegel RL, et al.: Global Cancer Statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN Estimates of Incidence and Mortality Worldwide for 36 Cancers in 185 Countries. CA Cancer J Clin 71 (3): 209-249, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] American Cancer Society: Cancer Facts and Figures 2024. American Cancer Society, 2024. Available online. Last accessed January 17, 2024. Surveillance Research Program, National Cancer Institute: SEER*Explorer: An interactive website for SEER cancer statistics. 	Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Available online. Last accessed March 6, 2024. Benvegnù L, Fattovich G, Noventa F, et al.: Concurrent hepatitis B and C virus infection and risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis. A prospective study. Cancer 74 (9): 2442-8, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Ikeda K, Saitoh S, Koida I, et al.: A multivariate analysis of risk factors for hepatocellular carcinogenesis: a prospective observation of 795 patients with viral and alcoholic cirrhosis. Hepatology 18 (1): 47-53, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Chiaramonte M, Stroffolini T, Vian A, et al.: Rate of incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with compensated viral cirrhosis. Cancer 85 (10): 2132-7, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Yuan JM, Govindarajan S, Gao YT, et al.: Prospective evaluation of infection with hepatitis G virus in relation to hepatocellular carcinoma in Shanghai, China. J Infect Dis 182 (5): 1300-3, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Di Bisceglie AM, Carithers RL, Gores GJ: Hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 28 (4): 1161-5, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Farinati F, Floreani A, De Maria N, et al.: Hepatocellular carcinoma in primary biliary cirrhosis. J Hepatol 21 (3): 315-6, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Bugianesi E, Leone N, Vanni E, et al.: Expanding the natural history of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: from cryptogenic cirrhosis to hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterology 123 (1): 134-40, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Fattovich G, Stroffolini T, Zagni I, et al.: Hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis: incidence and risk factors. Gastroenterology 127 (5 Suppl 1): S35-50, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Shiratori Y, Yoshida H, Omata M: Management of hepatocellular carcinoma: advances in diagnosis, treatment and prevention. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 1 (2): 277-90, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Rationale for Screening Tumor Markers for the Detection of Hepatocellular CarcinomaAlpha-fetoprotein Hepatic Ultrasonography Computed Tomography Efficacy of Screening and Surveillance Programs Alpha-fetoprotein The rationale for screening for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is based on the
concept that populations at high risk for HCC, such as those with cirrhosis,
can be identified.  However, 20% to 50% of patients presenting with HCC have
previously undiagnosed cirrhosis.[1,2]  These patients would not be recruited
into a surveillance program if the presence of cirrhosis is used to define a
target population.[3]  The modalities potentially available for screening
include serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and ultrasonography. 
 Abnormal screening results may lead to liver biopsy for diagnosis. Complications of liver biopsy are reported in 0.06% to 0.32% of patients, and typically occur within the first few hours after the biopsy. There are four categories of tumor markers that are currently being used or studied for the detection of hepatocellular carcinoma.  These include oncofetal antigens and glycoprotein antigens; enzymes and isoenzymes; genes; and cytokines.[4] Serum AFP, a fetal-specific glycoprotein antigen, is the most widely used tumor marker for detecting patients with HCC. The reported sensitivity of AFP for detecting  HCC varies widely in both
hepatitis B virus (HBV)-positive and HBV-negative populations, which is attributable to overlap
between screening and diagnosis study designs.[3]  When AFP is used for screening of
high-risk populations, a sensitivity of 39% to 97%, specificity of 76% to 95%,
and a positive predictive value (PPV) of 9% to 32% have been reported.[5-9] AFP is
not specific for HCC.  Titers also rise in acute or chronic hepatitis,[10]
in pregnancy, and in the presence of germ cell tumors. A prospective, 16-year, population-based, observational study of screening for
HCC included 1,487 Alaska Native individuals chronically infected with
 HBV. The study compared survival among screen-detected patients with HCC with a
historical comparison group of clinically diagnosed patients with HCC.[8]  The screening
program’s target was AFP determination every 6 months.  It achieved 97%
sensitivity and 95% specificity (excluding pregnant women) for HCC.  Such high
sensitivity and specificity have not been found for other high-risk groups,
such as individuals with cirrhosis.[11,12]  Whether screening actually improved
survival is not clear. A case-control study conducted within the U.S. Veterans Affairs (VA) health care system assessed whether screening with AFP and/or ultrasound reduced HCC mortality.  The cases were 238 patients with cirrhosis who died of HCC from 2013 to 2015 and who had been in VA care with a diagnosis of cirrhosis for 4 years or more before the diagnosis of HCC.  The controls, who did not die of HCC and had also been in VA care for 4 years or more, were matched for date of entry (or focal time) and for age, sex, race, model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score, and etiology of cirrhosis (mainly hepatitis C virus).  The study examiners, blinded to outcome status, used chart extraction to assess exposure to ultrasound and AFP screening.  The reason for testing (screening vs. other indication) was assessed, also blinded to outcome.  The study found that there was no difference between cases and controls regarding the proportion of patients who underwent screening ultrasound (52.9% vs. 54.2%), AFP screening (74.8% vs. 73.5%), or both.  The lack of difference persisted for tests within 1, 2, or 3 years of the outcome.[13]  Given the paucity of randomized controlled trials and their lack of strength, as noted elsewhere in this section, this case-control study—done with great care to avoid bias—comprised perhaps the strongest evidence about the efficacy of AFP or ultrasound screening; however, it  showed no benefit in HCC mortality. Limitations in the sensitivity and specificity of AFP in surveillance of high-risk populations led to the use of ultrasonography  as an additional method for
detection of HCC.[3]  Studies in both healthy hepatitis B
surface antigen carriers [5] and in patients with cirrhosis [7] have defined
the performance characteristics of ultrasound as a screening test for HCC. 
Sensitivity in the former was 71% and in the latter 78%, with 93% specificity. 
The PPVs were 14% and 73%, respectively.
In a study of patients who were on a waiting list for liver transplant, ultrasonography was found to have a sensitivity of 58%, a specificity of 94%, a negative predictive value of 91%, and a PPV of 68%.[14] A case-control study conducted in the VA population assessed whether screening with AFP and/or ultrasonography reduced HCC mortality. For more information, see the Alpha-fetoprotein section. Limitations in the sensitivity and specificity of AFP and  ultrasonography in
surveillance of high-risk populations, such as individuals with cirrhosis, led
to the assessment of computed tomography (CT) as an additional method for
detection of HCC.  Studies in patients with cirrhosis
suggest that CT may be a more sensitive test for HCC than ultrasonography or AFP more than 20 μg/L.[11,12] A controlled trial of 18,816 individuals aged 35 to 59 years with hepatitis B in Shanghai randomly assigned patients to a screening group using AFP and ultrasonography every 6 months versus a usual-care group. HCC mortality was lower in the screened group (83.2 vs. 131.5   per 100,000; mortality rate ratio of 0.63 [95% confidence interval (CI), 0.41–0.98]). While these results are promising, there were problems, including the following: The results varied in different publications.[15] The comparison group was not actively followed. The CI was near 1.0. Intention-to-treat analysis was not used. Assessment of outcome was not blinded. Generalizability to other populations is uncertain.[16] A randomized controlled trial studied 5,581 men aged 30 to 69 years who were chronic carriers of HBV between 1989 and 1995 in Qidong County, China.  Of these men, 3,712 were randomly assigned to a screening group and 1,869 to a control group.  Screening entailed 6-monthly AFP assays, with follow-up of patients having an abnormal (≥20 μg/L) test result.  All patients were followed up for liver cancer and/or death.  The overall sensitivity and specificity of the program were 55.3% and 86.5%, respectively.  In patients who complied with all scheduled screening tests, sensitivity was 80% and specificity was 80.9%.  The mortality rate in the screening group (1,138 per 100,000 person-years) was not significantly different from that in the control group (1,114 per 100,000 person-years), although AFP screening resulted in an earlier diagnosis of liver cancer (i.e., percentage of cases in stage I was significantly higher in the screened group [29.0%] than in the control group [6%]).[17] A  review concluded that the method of measuring AFP was not sensitive enough to detect HCC, affecting interpretation of the negative result of this trial.[15] Zaman SN, Johnson PJ, Williams R: Silent cirrhosis in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Implications for screening in high-incidence and low-incidence areas. Cancer 65 (7): 1607-10, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Primary liver cancer in Japan. Clinicopathologic features and results of surgical treatment. Liver Cancer Study Group of Japan. Ann Surg 211 (3): 277-87, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Collier J, Sherman M: Screening for hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 27 (1): 273-8, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Zhou L, Liu J, Luo F: Serum tumor markers for detection of hepatocellular carcinoma. World J Gastroenterol 12 (8): 1175-81, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Sherman M, Peltekian KM, Lee C: Screening for hepatocellular carcinoma in chronic carriers of hepatitis B virus: incidence and prevalence of hepatocellular carcinoma in a North American urban population. Hepatology 22 (2): 432-8, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Oka H, Tamori A, Kuroki T, et al.: Prospective study of alpha-fetoprotein in cirrhotic patients monitored for development of hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 19 (1): 61-6, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Pateron D, Ganne N, Trinchet JC, et al.: Prospective study of screening for hepatocellular carcinoma in Caucasian patients with cirrhosis. J Hepatol 20 (1): 65-71, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] McMahon BJ, Bulkow L, Harpster A, et al.: Screening for hepatocellular carcinoma in Alaska natives infected with chronic hepatitis B: a 16-year population-based study. Hepatology 32 (4 Pt 1): 842-6, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Soresi M, Magliarisi C, Campagna P, et al.: Usefulness of alpha-fetoprotein in the diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma. Anticancer Res 23 (2C): 1747-53, 2003 Mar-Apr. [PUBMED Abstract] Di Bisceglie AM, Hoofnagle JH: Elevations in serum alpha-fetoprotein levels in patients with chronic hepatitis B. Cancer 64 (10): 2117-20, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Chalasani N, Horlander JC, Said A, et al.: Screening for hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with advanced cirrhosis. Am J Gastroenterol 94 (10): 2988-93, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Peterson MS, Baron RL, Marsh JW, et al.: Pretransplantation surveillance for possible hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with cirrhosis: epidemiology and CT-based tumor detection rate in 430 cases with surgical pathologic correlation. Radiology 217 (3): 743-9, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Moon AM, Weiss NS, Beste LA, et al.: No Association Between Screening for Hepatocellular Carcinoma and Reduced Cancer-Related Mortality in Patients With Cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 155 (4): 1128-1139.e6, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Dodd GD, Miller WJ, Baron RL, et al.: Detection of malignant tumors in end-stage cirrhotic livers: efficacy of sonography as a screening technique. AJR Am J Roentgenol 159 (4): 727-33, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Aghoram R, Cai P, Dickinson JA: Alpha-foetoprotein and/or liver ultrasonography for screening of hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with chronic hepatitis B. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 9: CD002799, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Zhang BH, Yang BH, Tang ZY: Randomized controlled trial of screening for hepatocellular carcinoma. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 130 (7): 417-22, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Chen JG, Parkin DM, Chen QG, et al.: Screening for liver cancer: results of a randomised controlled trial in Qidong, China. J Med Screen 10 (4): 204-9, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Two kinds of harms or complications may result from screening. Direct harms may result from complications of liver biopsy done as part of the diagnostic workup. Such complications are reported in 0.06% to 0.32% of patients, and typically occur within the first few hours after the biopsy. Complications include hemorrhage, bile peritonitis, penetration of viscera, and pneumothorax. Rarely, death occurs as a direct result of liver biopsy (0.009%–0.12%). About one third of patients experience pain at the site of entry, in the right upper quadrant, or in the right shoulder.[1] Needle aspiration cytology and liver biopsy are rarely associated with needle-track implantation of malignant cells. Lead-time bias (earlier diagnosis in the natural
history of hepatocellular carcinoma [HCC] rather than improved survival from earlier diagnosis and
treatment), length bias (earlier detection of slower-growing and less
aggressive tumors through screening), and/or overdiagnosis of HCC (detection of
tumors that will not affect morbidity or mortality) may wholly or partially
account for the improved 5-year and 10-year survival rates reported. Tobkes AI, Nord HJ: Liver biopsy: review of methodology and complications. Dig Dis 13 (5): 267-74, 1995 Sep-Oct. [PUBMED Abstract] The PDQ cancer information summaries are reviewed regularly and updated as
new information becomes available.  This section describes the latest
changes made to this summary as of the date above. Significance Updated statistics with estimated new cases and deaths for 2024 (cited American  Cancer Society as reference 2). This summary is written and maintained by the PDQ Screening and Prevention Editorial Board, which is
editorially independent of NCI.  The summary reflects an independent review of
the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or NIH.  More
information about summary policies and the role of the PDQ Editorial Boards  in
maintaining the PDQ summaries can be found on the About This PDQ Summary and PDQ® Cancer Information for Health Professionals pages. This PDQ cancer information summary for health professionals provides comprehensive, peer-reviewed, evidence-based information about liver (hepatocellular) cancer screening. It is intended as a resource to inform and assist clinicians in the care of their patients.  It does not provide formal guidelines or recommendations for making health care decisions. This summary is reviewed regularly and updated as necessary by the PDQ Screening and Prevention Editorial Board, which is editorially independent of the National Cancer Institute (NCI).  The summary reflects an independent review of the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Board members review recently published articles each month to determine whether an article should: be discussed at a meeting, be cited with text, or replace or update an existing article that is already cited. Changes to the summaries are made through a consensus process in which Board members evaluate the strength of the evidence in  the published articles and determine how the article should be included in the summary. Any comments or questions about the summary content should be submitted to Cancer.gov through the NCI website's Email Us. Do not contact the individual Board Members with questions or comments about the summaries. Board members will not respond to individual inquiries. Some of the reference citations in this summary are accompanied by a level-of-evidence designation. These designations are intended to help readers assess the strength of the evidence supporting the use of specific interventions or approaches. The PDQ Screening and Prevention Editorial Board uses a formal evidence ranking system in developing its level-of-evidence designations. PDQ is a registered trademark. Although the content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text, it cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless it is presented in its entirety and is regularly updated. However, an author would be permitted to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks succinctly: [include excerpt from the summary].” The preferred citation for this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Screening and Prevention Editorial Board. PDQ Liver (Hepatocellular) Cancer Screening. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/liver/hp/liver-screening-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389228] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use within the PDQ summaries only. Permission to use images outside the context of PDQ information must be obtained from the owner(s) and cannot be granted by  the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the illustrations in this summary, along with many other cancer-related images, is available in Visuals Online, a collection of over 2,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used as a basis for insurance reimbursement determinations. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s Email Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NCL Collaborators - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/nano/research/ncl/about/collaborators
txt: All of NCL's programs (Assay Cascade, cCRADA, Technical Services) are open to researchers from any institution. Non-US organizations are also eligible.  Recent Collaborators  Testimonials  Academic Collaborators  Corporate Collaborators  Government Collaborators  Recent Collaborators Testimonials Academic Collaborators Corporate Collaborators Government Collaborators Recent Collaborators Drs. Ine Lentacker and Rein Verbeke, Ghent Research Group on Nanomedicines, Ghent University
mRNA Galsomes are mRNA lipid nanoparticle vaccines co-encapsulating antigen-encoding nucleoside-modified mRNA and the broad-spectrum adjuvant α-galactosylceramide.  The unique value of α-GalCer is that it empowers conventional T-cell responses while simultaneously broadening the immune response by activating NKT- and NK cells, which is specifically of interest for the development of vaccines against intracellular bacterial infections and therapeutic cancer vaccines. This vaccine platform technology has demonstrated prolonged survival in preclinical cancer models and is being prepared to start a phase I clinical trial in lung cancer patients in collaboration with the GMP unit of Ghent University Hospital.https://www.drugdelivery.be/ Peptinovo Biopharma
Chemotherapy is the foundation of cancer treatment, but its potential is undermined by treatment-limiting toxicities.  Improving treatment potency and safety simultaneously by targeting toxic chemotherapy drugs directly to tumors for selective destruction while avoiding damage to healthy tissues would be highly beneficial but remains elusive.  Peptinovo Biopharma has created the peptide-amphiphile lipid micelle (PALMTM) to enable safer and more effective chemotherapy.  PALM is a 15nm mimic of natural high-density lipoprotein (HDL), which circulates in the plasma to shuttle lipids among tissues, including lipid delivery to cells expressing scavenger receptor B-type I (SR-BI), also known as the HDL-receptor.  Cancer cells are enriched in SR-BI to acquire the HDL lipids needed for propagation.  PALM is a ligand for SR-BI and is loaded with a lipid-like prodrug of paclitaxel to enable targeting to cancer cells.  Rodent studies show dramatically reduced side effects (e.g., liver enzymes, lethality, peripheral neuropathy, anemia, alopecia)  while maintaining tumor inhibition.  Tissues normally expressing SR-BI, including the liver and adrenal glands, are unaffected.  We are excited to be accepted into collaboration with the Nanotechnology Characterization Lab.  Partnership in the array of nanotechnology protocols at NCL will boost PALM on the path to clinical trials.https://peptinovo.com/ Privo Technologies
Privo Technologies, Inc. (Privo) is a phase 3 clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company committed to developing safer innovative therapeutics designed to eliminate cancers, and prevent recurrence. Privo’s cutting-edge PRV nanoengineered platform technology is a culmination of 12 years of research and development at MIT’s prestigious Bob Langer Lab and Privo’s own R&D facility. Our platform stands at the forefront of innovation, offering solutions aimed to redefine drug delivery and therapeutic effectiveness. Privo’s nanoparticles are at the core of our technology, providing a sophisticated solution for encapsulating active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs). These nanoparticles serve a dual purpose by not only safeguarding volatile drugs but also facilitating sustained release, leading to enhanced cell uptake. Our nanoengineered technology ensures the precise delivery of therapeutic agents, maximizing their efficacy while minimizing adverse effects. Our platform also includes a matrix technology that incorporates Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS) excipients, playing a pivotal role in defining the dosage form for Privo’s drug products. Whether it’s injectables, patches, or hydrogels, Privo’s Matrix ensures the optimal delivery system for a diverse range of drugs. The versatility of the matrix empowers pharmaceutical professionals to tailor formulations that meet specific patient needs and optimize treatment outcomes. With a focus for localized, targeted oncology treatments, three promising platform derivatives are currently advancing through clinical development. First, PRV111, is a topical bio-adhesive transmucosal nanoengineered patch with an initial indication for treating accessible tumors in the oral cavity. This approach maximizes the therapeutic impact while minimizing damage to surrounding healthy tissues. Second, PRV211, is an intraoperative chemotherapy treatment that stands out as a novel tool for surgeons, enabling them to address remaining tumor cells following tumor resection. This localized intraoperative chemotherapy has the potential to significantly reduce the risk of cancer recurrence and improve patient survival rates. Finally, PRV131, is an intratumoral injection system co-formulated with a proprietary diluent for enhancing drug permeability intended for direct drug administration into tumor sites, boasting durability exceeding 30 days with just a single treatment. Through Privo’s PRV platform technology, we aim to provide better and more accessible treatment options to diverse patient populations around the world, with the potential to transform standard of care for treating solid tumors. Privo is headquartered in Peabody, a suburb of Boston, Massachusetts. https://privotechnologies.com/ Testimonials Chong-xian Pan, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, VA Boston Healthcare System
“NCL was extremely helpful during the drug development of my bladder cancer-specific nanoparticles. They performed the in vitro characterization of my nanoparticles, and I used this data to support an IND application and currently have an ongoing Phase I trial (Clinicaltrials.gov identifier No: NCT05519241; PI: Pan). The NCL staff are very friendly, responsive and knowledgeable. I am highly satisfied with the service.” Len Pagliaro, Sona Nanotech, Inc.
“Siva Therapeutics was first accepted into the NCL program several years ago.  A few years later we completed the Assay Cascade program, and the data, learnings, contacts, and advice we received during this time were invaluable to us as an early-stage company in the cancer nano-device space.  More recently, Siva was acquired by Sona Nanotech, which had become our nanomaterial manufacturing partner.  After acquisition and further development of the manufacturing process for our nanomaterial, the NCL team continued to support our project with ongoing work to validate physical chemical properties, sterility, endotoxin, and other key parameters of the improved material.  Recently, we were very pleased to have NCL team members participate in an FDA Pre-Submission meeting, and the NCL team provided valuable input as well as important clarification of next steps in our development process.  The NCL has played a key role in our ability to move ahead in the cancer nano-therapy space.” Simon Jenson, MonTa Biosciences
“MonTa Biosciences collaborated with NCL to characterize the micelle immunotherapy Drug Product MBS8 in both biological and analytical assays. We have been very happy for the work conducted at NCL which has supported our understanding of the drug from a biological, toxicological and CMC point of view. The NCL team conducted the agreed studies timely and with interesting discussions in the process, which altogether has contributed to the development of MBS8 through GLP toxicology studies and into clinical testing. We can highly recommend testing new nanotechnologies through the NCL program. ” Glen Kwon, Co-D Therapeutics
"We had a fruitful collaboration with NCL on our oligo(lactic acid)8-paclitaxel (o(LA)8-PTX) prodrug micellar formulation – comprehensive characterization of physicochemical properties, cytotoxicity, immunomodulation, metabolism, LC-MS and pharmacokinetics. o(LA)8-PTX produced a high level of lactic acid-paclitaxel metabolite in plasma of rats, ca., 5-fold higher than Abraxane®. It was concluded that the lactic acid-paclitaxel metabolite is involved in pharmacological activity of o(LA)8-PTX, acting as a taxane analogue. Our research on o(LA)8-PTX was published in a theme issue on “Recent Advances in Drug Delivery” in the AAPS Journal. Our collaboration with NCL was productive, collegial and highly informative. Using feedback that o(LA) 8-PTX will likely be considered a new chemical entity (NCE) by the FDA, development of the o(LA) 8-PTX prodrug micellar formulation will proceed by the 505(b)(1) pathway in anticipation of a pre-IND meeting with the FDA.” Young Kwon, University of California
"Every step with the NCL was a rare opportunity to work with a group of exceptionally qualified experts in the interface of nanotechnology and medicine. As a matter of fact, the outcome of the NCL’s Assay Cascade Program, including its proprietary SITUA assays, not only elevated the team’s confidence about the technology’s potential to the next level but also reinforced the industry partner’s commitment to moving it forward to clinical translation and commercialization. Communications with the NCL team were flawlessly efficient, timely, and insightful, and the outcomes were more exciting than expected as presented in the thoroughly, analytically, and professionally drafted report. I have been truly enjoying working with the NCL team from the beginning, when publishing the discoveries together, and while preparing an IND application. I most strongly encourage all teams working on clinical translation and commercialization of nanotechnology for this privileged experience!” Pauline Lau, Suntec Medical
“We extend our sincere appreciation to the NCL for their pivotal role in advancing our STM-001 project at Suntec Medical. The NCL Assay Cascade provides crucial insights into the physical and chemical properties of STM-001 with studies of high scientific standards and great technical expertise. With NCL's support, STM-001 is ready to enter clinical developments for brain cancers sooner than we expected. We highly recommend NCL for organizations seeking top-tier nanotechnology characterization services.” Academic Collaborators Simeon Adesina
	Howard University  Samuel Achilefu
	Washington University  James Adair
	Penn State University  Kirill Afonin
	University of North Carolina-Charlotte  Raag Airan
	Stanford University  Massoud Akhtari
	University of California, Los Angeles  Mansoor Amiji
	Northeastern University  Daniel Anderson
	Massachusetts Institute of Technology  Yechezkel (Chezy) Barenholz
	Hebrew University  Angela Belcher
	Massachusetts Institute of Technology  Peter Bonitatibus
	Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute  Andrew Brenner
	University of Texas, Health Science Center  Jeffrey Bulte
	Johns Hopkins School of Medicine  Esther Chang
	Georgetown University  Ashutosh Chilkoti
	Duke University  James Connor
	Penn State Cancer Institute  Antonio Costa
	University of Connecticut  Heike Daldrup-Link
	Stanford University  Shanta Dhar
	University of Miami  Katherine Ferrara
	University of California, Davis  Mauro Ferrari
	Houston Methodist Research Institute  Darin Furgeson
	University of Wisconsin–Madison  Alberto Gabizon
	Shaare Zedek Medical Center  Sanjiv (Sam) Gambhir
	Stanford University  William Gmeiner
	Wake Forest School of Medicine  Jordan Green
	Johns Hopkins University  Peixuan Guo
	Ohio State University  P. Jack Hoopes
	Dartmouth College  Jeremiah Johnson
	Massachusetts Institute of Technology  Alexander Kabanov
	University of North Carolina  Masakazu Kamata
	University of Alabama-Birmingham  Efstathios Karathanasis
	Case Western Reserve University  Kattesh Katti
	University of Missouri  Mark Kester
	Penn State College of Medicine  Anthony Kim
	University of Maryland School of Medicine  Joachim Kohn
	Rutgers University  Jindrich Kopecek
	University of Utah  Raoul Kopelman
	University of Michigan  Young Jik Kwon
	University of California, Irvine  Robert Lee
	Ohio State University  Chun Li
	University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center  Julia Ljubimova
	Cedars-Sinai Medical Center  Jonathan Lovell
	University at Buffalo  Zheng-Rong Lu
	Case Western Reserve University  Anirban Maitra
	Johns Hopkins University  John McDonald
	Georgia Tech Research Corporation  Andrew Miller
	Imperial College London  James Moon
	University of Michigan  Russ Mumper
	University of North Carolina  Yusuke Nakamura
	University of Chicago  Andre Nel and Huan Meng
	University of California, Los Angeles  Shuming Nie
	Emory University  Chong-xian Pan
	University of California, Davis  Martin Philbert
	University of Michigan  Robert Prud'homme
	Princeton University  Kannan Rangaramanujam
	Johns Hopkins School of Medicine  Lenny Rome
	University of California, Los Angeles  Erkki Ruoslahti
	University of California, Santa Barbara  Aliasger Salem
	University of Iowa  Devanand Sarkar
	Virginia Commonwealth University  Janet Sawicki
	Lankenau Institute for Medical Research  Anna Schwendeman
	University of Michigan  Eric Simanek
	Texas A&M University  Jill Smith
	Georgetown University  Anil Sood
	University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center  Matthias Stephan
	Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center  C. Shad Thaxton
	Northwestern University  Vladimir Torchilin
	Northeastern University  Ed Turos
	University of South Florida  Alex Wei
	Purdue University  Peisheng Xu
	University of South Carolina  Lily Yang
	Emory University  John Yu
	Cedars-Sinai Medical Center  William Zamboni
	University of North Carolina  Cristina Zavaleta
	University of Southern California  Chi Zhang
	University of Nebraska Medical Center  Miqin Zhang
	University of Washington  Corporate Collaborators Aadi Bioscience  Alnis Biosciences  Altus Formulation  Amgen  Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals  AstraZeneca  Avidea Technologies  Avidimer Therapeutics  Azaya Therapeutics  Bexion Pharmaceuticals  BIND Therapeutics  Bio-Synectics  BW Therapeutics  Carigent Therapeutics  Celator Pharmaceuticals  City of Hope  Cnano Medicine  Co-D Therapeutics  Concarlo Holdings  Curadigm  Cureport  CuriRx  CytImmune Sciences  Dendritic NanoTechnologies  Egen  Ensysce Biosciences  Eunoia Biotech  Evident Technologies  GE Global Research  Haima Therapeutics  Intezyne Technologies  January Therapeutics  Kereos  Kodikaz Therapeutics  LaboPharm  LipoCure  Luna Innovations  Merck KGaA  Merrimack Pharmaceuticals  MonTa Biosciences  NaDeNo Nanosciences  Nami Therapeutics  Nanobiotix  NanoHybrids  Nanokide Therapeutics  Nanoligent  Nanology Labs  Nanoprobes  NanoScan Imaging  Nanospectra Biosciences  Nanovalent Pharmaceuticals  Nemucore Medical Innovations  NexImmune  Oncolmmune  Ontario Institute for Cancer Research  Panacea Biotec  Parabon NanoLabs  PDS Biotechnology  PDX Pharmaceuticals  PeptiMed  Pfizer  ProNAi Therapeutics  Proteogenomics Research Institute  Qualiber  Rexahn Pharmaceuticals  Salvacion USA  Seva Therapeutics  SignaBlok  Signpath Pharma  Siva Therapeutics  SN BioScience  Sona Nanotech  SunTec Medical  SynerGene Therapeutics  Tego Biosciences  Tyndall Formulation Services  United Immunity  VerImmune  Westwood Bioscience  Window Therapeutics  ZY Therapeutics  Government Collaborators FDA’s Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research  FDA’s Center for Devices and Radiological Health  FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research  FDA’s Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition  FDA’s National Center for Toxicological Research  FDA’s Office of Generic Drugs  NCI’s Center for Cancer Research  National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences  United States Army Center for Environmental Health Research  United States Army Medical Research Institute for Infectious Diseases  United States Naval Research Laboratory 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Olfactory Neuroblastoma - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/pediatric-adult-rare-tumor/rare-tumors/other-rare-tumors/olfactory-neuroblastoma
txt: Olfactory neuroblastoma, or esthesioneuroblastoma, is a tumor that grows in the nasal cavity. The nasal cavity has nerves and other tissue that are responsible for the sense of smell. This kind of tumor begins in the nasal cavity and can grow into the nearby eyes and brain. Olfactory neuroblastoma can also spread to other parts of the body, such as the neck, lungs, and bones. Olfactory neuroblastoma is a rare type of cancer, making up only 3% of nasal cavity tumor cases. Olfactory neuroblastoma affects only about 1 person per 2.5 million each year. Olfactory neuroblastoma can form at any age but is most commonly seen in people ages 50 to 70 years old. Olfactory neuroblastoma can cause several symptoms as the tumor grows, including: Nose bleeds  Loss of the sense of smell  Difficulty breathing through the nose  Pain  Imaging: If you have symptoms of olfactory neuroblastoma, your doctor will use imaging scans such as X-ray, CT, and MRI to look at where the tumor is and how big it is. They will also check for signs that the tumor has spread to other parts of the body. Biopsy: To check if the tumor is olfactory neuroblastoma your doctor will do a biopsy, taking a small sample from the tumor. An expert, called a pathologist, will study cells from the sample under the microscope to see what kind of tumor it is. Treatment for each patient will be unique. You should go to an expert in olfactory neuroblastoma treatment to decide the best approach for your tumor. You can contact MyPART for help finding experts near you. Treatment options to discuss with your doctor include: Surgery: Surgery is used to remove as much of the tumor as possible and some surrounding healthy tissue to improve the chances of removing all of the tumor cells. Radiation therapy: Radiation therapy is a treatment option for some olfactory neuroblastoma tumors. Radiation therapy may be the main treatment, or it may be used after surgery to help reduce the chances that the tumor will grow back. Chemotherapy: Chemotherapy may be used in combination with radiation after surgery to treat some olfactory neuroblastoma tumors or in cases where the tumor has spread to other parts of the body. No, olfactory neuroblastoma is not thought to run in families. Scientists are always working to understand how cancer forms, but it can be hard to prove. So far, we do not yet know what causes olfactory neuroblastoma to form, but scientists have found that changes in some parts of the DNA, called chromosome 2, chromosome 5, chromosome 6, chromosome 7, and chromosome 20, may be involved. The estimate of how a disease will affect you long-term is called prognosis. Every person is different and prognosis will depend on many factors, such as: Where the tumor is in your body  If the cancer has spread to other parts of your body  How much of the tumor was taken out during surgery  If you want information on your prognosis, it is important to talk to your doctor. Also, NCI has resources to help you understand cancer prognosis. Doctors estimate olfactory neuroblastoma survival rates by how groups of people with olfactory neuroblastoma have done in the past. The survival rate varies depending on the stage of disease but is thought to range from 50-90%. To learn more about olfactory neuroblastoma, watch the videos below of recorded Patient Education Meetings hosted by Dr. Nyall London from the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders (NIDCD) Sinonasal and Skull Base Tumors Program, which feature experts on olfactory neuroblastoma. 4th Annual ONB Patient Education Meeting 3rd Annual ONB Patient Education Meeting ONB Patient Education Meeting in Spanish - Feb 2022 ONB Community Conference Series October 2021 2nd Annual Olfactory Neuroblastoma Patient Education Meeting Olfactory Neuroblastoma Community Conference Series 2021
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Treating precancerous anal growths cuts risk of anal cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2022/hiv-hsil-anal-cancer-anchor-study
txt:  Posted:
June 15, 2022  240-760-6600 A cartoon from the ANCHOR study website, anchorstudy.org A large clinical trial of people living with HIV has found that treating anal precancerous growths known as high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions, or HSIL, reduces the chance that anal cancer will develop by more than half. Results from the Anal Cancer/HSIL Outcomes Research (ANCHOR) study were published June 16 in the New England Journal of Medicine. The trial was funded by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), part of the National Institutes of Health. “We've now shown for the first time that treating anal HSIL is effective at reducing the incidence of anal cancer in a very high-risk group of people — people living with HIV,” said Joel Palefsky, M.D., of the University of California, San Francisco, who led the study. “By showing that treatment for HSIL reduces the risk of anal cancer, this study also provides a rationale for screening for anal HSIL in people with HIV,” said Robert Yarchoan, M.D., director of NCI’s Office of HIV and AIDS Malignancy. The trial was conducted through the NCI-supported AIDS Malignancy Consortium. Although anal cancer is relatively rare in the general population, it is the fourth most common cancer among people living with HIV. The incidence of anal cancer is estimated to be 89 per 100,000 among men living with HIV who have sex with men and between 18.6 and 35.6 per 100,000 among women living with HIV. In comparison, the incidence of anal cancer in the general population is 1.6 per 100,000. Nearly all cases of anal cancer are caused by infection of anal cells with cancer-causing types of human papillomavirus (HPV). If the immune system does not fight off the infection, the lingering infection can cause the cells to become progressively more abnormal, ultimately developing into HSIL and then, in some cases, into anal cancer. This progression is similar to what is seen in cervical cancer, which is also caused by HPV. Although HPV vaccination can prevent new anal HPV infections, no evidence-based recommendations are currently available to guide screening for and treatment of anal HSIL. Routine screening for cervical cancer with HPV and/or Pap testing and removing cervical HSIL has been shown to prevent many cases of cervical cancer. However, it has been unclear whether the treatment of anal HSIL found through screening similarly prevents anal cancer. Moreover, the treatment of anal HSIL is more challenging than the treatment of cervical HSIL, and recurrences are common. The ANCHOR study is the first randomized controlled trial to determine whether treating anal HSIL is a safe and effective strategy for reducing the progression of HSIL to anal cancer. In the phase 3 trial, which was carried out at 25 sites nationwide, 10,723 people age 35 or older living with HIV underwent screening for HSIL with high-resolution anoscopy, a procedure to examine the inner lining of the anus and rectum. Of these, 4,459 people were diagnosed with HSIL. People in this group were then randomly assigned to receive treatment or to receive active monitoring with no treatment, the current standard of care. Most people in the treatment group received office-based electrocautery, a procedure in which heat from an electric current is used to destroy abnormal tissue. After a median follow-up of just over two years, 21 people in the active monitoring group were diagnosed with anal cancer, compared with nine people in the treatment group — a 57% reduction. The majority of the side effects in the treatment group were mild and included pain and bleeding. “The data support treating anal HSIL as the standard of care for people living with HIV who are 35 years of age or older,” said Dr. Palefsky.  He noted that the findings could also potentially lead to recommendations for screening for HSIL in people living with HIV and might also change the standard of care for other groups at lower but still increased risk of anal cancer, including HIV-negative men who have sex with men, women who have had other HPV-related precancers or cancers, and people who are immunosuppressed after organ transplantation or other reasons. The authors noted that the clinicians participating in the study were well trained in high-resolution anoscopy and in treating HSIL. “Our results may not be replicated if high-resolution anoscopy and treatment are performed by clinicians with less training and clinical support,” the researchers wrote. Dr. Palefsky said the findings highlight the need for additional training of clinicians, as well as more research on effective approaches for screening and treating HSIL. “Although we did show a statistically significant reduction in anal cancer due to treatment, we did not prevent all the cases of cancer,” Dr. Palefsky noted. “What that points to is a need for ongoing follow-up of everybody who has developed anal HSIL, even if they've been treated, as well as for improvements in the treatments that we use.” As for next steps in the study, Dr. Palefsky said they have developed a biorepository of tissue samples from the study participants. These samples will be analyzed to help identify possible biomarkers for who should be screened for HSIL and to investigate the biology behind how HSIL progresses to anal cancer. “This study will give an absolute wealth of information about anal cancer,” Dr. Yarchoan said. About the National Cancer Institute (NCI): NCI leads the National Cancer Program and NIH’s efforts to dramatically reduce the prevalence of cancer and improve the lives of cancer patients and their families, through research into prevention and cancer biology, the development of new interventions, and the training and mentoring of new researchers. For more information about cancer, please visit the NCI website at cancer.gov or call NCI’s contact center, the Cancer Information Service, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit nih.gov.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: CitSci Working Group - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/resources/citizen-science/working-group
txt: The NIH Citizen Science Working Group is composed of members from across the 27 institutes and centers at the National Institutes of Health. Our members are interested in investigating the use of citizen science and advancing the incorporation of citizen science methodologies in biomedical research in a way that maintains the high level of scientific and ethical standards of the NIH. We work with other federal agencies to learn about their citizen science, crowdsourcing, and challenge competition efforts. We also participate in the Federal Community of Practice on Crowdsourcing and Citizen Science (FedCCS), a trans-agency group that shares developments and best practices in the field. Jennifer Couch, PhD
NIH Citizen Science Coordinatorcouchj@mail.nih.gov
Interests and expertise: cancer, serious games, innovative collaboration methods. Ellen Mintz, PhD
NIH Citizen Science Working Group Supportellen.mintz@nih.gov
Interests and expertise: patient engagement, clinical trials, data science.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Personal Genomics Podcast Trailer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/ccg/blog/personal-genomics-podcast/trailer
txt: From the Center for Cancer Genomics at the National Cancer Institute, a new podcast exploring the narratives of cancer genomics researchers. Hear personal stories from researchers about what it’s like to work in one of the most complex areas of cancer research. Coming early 2020.  Stream the Trailer  Trailer Transcript  Stream the Trailer Trailer Transcript Stream the Trailer Personal Genomics Podcast: Stream the Trailer YouTube  YouTube Music  Trailer Transcript PEGGY WANG: Do you want to just, get into it? DENISE WOLF: Sure! PEGGY: Ok— DENISE: Before we get into it— [SONG: “Hope and Love”] PEGGY: What is it like to do cancer genomics research? This is the Center for Cancer Genomics at the National Cancer Institute and we are bringing you a podcast, called Personal Genomics. On this show, we'll hear personal stories from researchers about what they go through for their work. Because genomics is exciting, and hard, and complicated. And it’s done by real people. LOU STAUDT: And it just drove me nuts because I'm a perfectionist and it was very hard to get this perfect. PEGGY: We'll hear how often there's a lot more to the story than we can find in the publication. PEGGY: I think I need to notify Nature that ASH ALIZADEH: popcorn may be involved, yes. PEGGY: We'll hear about strategies that didn't work so well. SHIRLEY LIU: I used to routinely sleep 5 hours a day and that's not very good. PEGGY: How things don't always go as planned. ASH: My heart just broke that this, my experiment is just ruined. PEGGY: We'll hear about unique experiences from inside the lab. LOU: It was repetitive but like eating peanuts. PEGGY: And outside. DENISE: I was a Blue Bear, a big puffy blue bear [laughing]. PEGGY: And about the long journey to the lab. SHOSHANA LEVY: I made him be a physician once a week. RONALD LEVY: You know, the word "make" is interesting. PEGGY: And through it all, we'll try to understand what it’s like to be in cancer genomics. HUI SHEN: It's really okay to feel that you are not balanced, its normal to feel you are struggling a little bit. PEGGY: And what is it that really motivates someone to work in one of the most complex areas of cancer research. ASH: it's a complicated issue and this is something that I've worked on for a lot of my life so I feel pretty strongly about. DENISE: I felt like I found my people like oh this is it this is where I should be. LOU: You developed this, this real desire to help people. PEGGY: Personal Genomics. Coming soon. Subscribe to our podcast, or visit us at cancer.gov/personalgenomics.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Pituitary Tumors—Health Professional Version - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/pituitary/hp
txt:  Pituitary Tumors Treatment   Clinical Trials to Treat Pituitary Tumors   Cancer Prevention Overview (PDQ®)   Genetics of Endocrine and Neuroendocrine Neoplasias   Cancer Genetics Overview (PDQ®)  Cancer Genetics Risk Assessment and Counseling (PDQ®)   Cancer Screening Overview (PDQ®)  We offer evidence-based supportive and palliative care information
     for health professionals on the assessment and management of cancer-related symptoms and conditions.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Complications, GVHD, and Late Effects After Pediatric HSCT (PDQ®) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/childhood-cancers/hp-stem-cell-transplant/gvhd
txt:  Pretransplant Comorbidities That Affect the Risk of Transplant-Related Mortality: Predictive Power of the Hematopoietic Cell Transplant–Specific Comorbidity Index  Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant (HSCT)–Related Acute Complications  Chronic Graft-Versus-Host Disease (GVHD)  Late Mortality After Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant (HSCT)  Late Effects After Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant (HSCT) in Children  Latest Updates to This Summary (12/13/2023)  About This PDQ Summary  Because of the intensity of therapy associated with the transplant process, the pretransplant clinical status of recipients (e.g., age, presence of infections or organ dysfunction, and functional status) is associated with a risk of transplant-related mortality. The best tool to assess the impact of pretransplant comorbidities on outcomes after transplant was developed by adapting an existing comorbidity scale, the Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI).  Investigators at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center systematically defined which of the CCI elements were correlated with transplant-related mortality in adult and pediatric patients.  They also determined several additional comorbidities that have predictive power specific to transplant patients. Successful validation defined what is now termed the hematopoietic cell transplant–specific comorbidity index (HCT-CI).[1,2]  The rate of transplant-related mortality increases with the presence of  cardiac, hepatic, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, infectious, and autoimmune comorbidities, or a history of previous solid tumors (see Table 1). The predictive power of this index for both transplant-related mortality and overall survival (OS) is strong, with a hazard ratio of 3.54 (95% confidence interval [CI], 2.0–6.3) for nonrelapse mortality and 2.69 (95% CI, 1.8–4.1) for survival for patients with a score of 3 or higher, compared with those who have a score of 0.  Although the original studies were performed with patients receiving intense myeloablative approaches, the HCT-CI has also been shown to predict outcomes for patients receiving reduced-intensity and nonmyeloablative regimens.[3] It has also been combined with disease status [4] and Karnofsky score,[5] leading to even better prediction of survival outcomes. In addition, high HCT-CI scores (>3) have been associated with a higher risk of grades III to IV acute graft-versus-host disease.[6] Most patients assessed in the HCT-CI studies have been adults, and the comorbidities listed are skewed toward adult diseases.  The relevance of this scale for pediatric and young adult recipients of hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) has been explored in  several studies. Evidence (use of HCT-CI score in pediatrics): A retrospective cohort study was conducted at four large centers of pediatric patients (median age, 6 years) with a  wide variety of both malignant and nonmalignant disorders.[7] The HCT-CI was predictive of both nonrelapse mortality and survival. The 1-year nonrelapse mortality rates were:10% for patients with scores of  0.14% for patients with scores of 1 to 2.28% for patients with scores of 3 or higher.The 1-year OS rates were:88% for patients with scores of 0. 67% for patients with scores of 1 to 2.62% for patients with scores of 3 or higher. A second study included young adults (aged 16–39 years) and demonstrated the following:[8] Similar increases in mortality with higher HCT-CI scores. The nonrelapse mortality rates were 24% for patients with scores of 0 to 2 and 38% for patients with scores of 3 or higher. The OS rates were 46% for patients with scores of 0 to 2 and 28% for patients with scores of 3 or higher. As part of a prospective validation of the HCT-CI through the Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research, 23,876 patients—including 1,755 children—who underwent transplant between 2007 and 2009 were scored and outcomes were tracked.[9]  Although adults treated with myeloablative regimens had increased mortality with scores of 1 or 2, pediatric patients did not have increased mortality until a score of 3 or higher was noted. The HCT-CI was predictive of both nonrelapse mortality and survival. The 1-year nonrelapse mortality rates were:10% for patients with scores of  0.14% for patients with scores of 1 to 2.28% for patients with scores of 3 or higher. The 1-year OS rates were:88% for patients with scores of 0. 67% for patients with scores of 1 to 2.62% for patients with scores of 3 or higher. 10% for patients with scores of  0. 14% for patients with scores of 1 to 2. 28% for patients with scores of 3 or higher. 88% for patients with scores of 0. 67% for patients with scores of 1 to 2. 62% for patients with scores of 3 or higher. Similar increases in mortality with higher HCT-CI scores. The nonrelapse mortality rates were 24% for patients with scores of 0 to 2 and 38% for patients with scores of 3 or higher. The OS rates were 46% for patients with scores of 0 to 2 and 28% for patients with scores of 3 or higher. Although adults treated with myeloablative regimens had increased mortality with scores of 1 or 2, pediatric patients did not have increased mortality until a score of 3 or higher was noted. Most of the reported comorbidities in these studies were with respiratory or hepatic conditions and infections.[7,8]  In the adolescent and young adult study, patients with pre-HSCT pulmonary dysfunction were at particularly high risk of comorbidity, with a 2-year OS rate of 29%, compared with 61% in those with normal lung function before HSCT.[8] Sorror ML, Maris MB, Storb R, et al.: Hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT)-specific comorbidity index: a new tool for risk assessment before allogeneic HCT. Blood 106 (8): 2912-9, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] ElSawy M, Storer BE, Pulsipher MA, et al.: Multi-centre validation of the prognostic value of the haematopoietic cell transplantation- specific comorbidity index among recipient of allogeneic haematopoietic cell transplantation. Br J Haematol 170 (4): 574-83, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Sorror ML, Storer BE, Maloney DG, et al.: Outcomes after allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation with nonmyeloablative or myeloablative conditioning regimens for treatment of lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 111 (1): 446-52, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Sorror ML, Sandmaier BM, Storer BE, et al.: Comorbidity and disease status based risk stratification of outcomes among patients with acute myeloid leukemia or myelodysplasia receiving allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation. J Clin Oncol 25 (27): 4246-54, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Sorror M, Storer B, Sandmaier BM, et al.: Hematopoietic cell transplantation-comorbidity index and Karnofsky performance status are independent predictors of morbidity and mortality after allogeneic nonmyeloablative hematopoietic cell transplantation. Cancer 112 (9): 1992-2001, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Sorror ML, Martin PJ, Storb RF, et al.: Pretransplant comorbidities predict severity of acute graft-versus-host disease and subsequent mortality. Blood 124 (2): 287-95, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Smith AR, Majhail NS, MacMillan ML, et al.: Hematopoietic cell transplantation comorbidity index predicts transplantation outcomes in pediatric patients. Blood 117 (9): 2728-34, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Wood W, Deal A, Whitley J, et al.: Usefulness of the hematopoietic cell transplantation-specific comorbidity index (HCT-CI) in predicting outcomes for adolescents and young adults with hematologic malignancies undergoing allogeneic stem cell transplant. Pediatr Blood Cancer 57 (3): 499-505, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Sorror ML, Logan BR, Zhu X, et al.: Prospective Validation of the Predictive Power of the Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation Comorbidity Index: A Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research Study. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 21 (8): 1479-87, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Infectious Risks and Immune Recovery After TransplantVaccination after transplant Sinusoidal Obstruction Syndrome/Veno-occlusive Disease (SOS/VOD)Prevention and treatment of SOS/VOD Transplant-Associated Thrombotic Microangiopathy (TA-TMA) Treatment of TA-TMA Idiopathic Pneumonia Syndrome (IPS)Treatment of IPS Autoimmune Cytopenias (AIC)Treatment of AIC Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV)–Associated Lymphoproliferative DisorderTreatment of EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorder Acute GVHDPrevention and treatment of acute GVHD Vaccination after transplant Prevention and treatment of SOS/VOD Treatment of TA-TMA Treatment of IPS Treatment of AIC Treatment of EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorder Prevention and treatment of acute GVHD Defective immune reconstitution is a major barrier to successful HSCT, regardless of graft source.[1,2] Serious infections have accounted for a significant percentage (4%–20%) of late deaths after HSCT.[3] Factors that can significantly slow immune recovery include the following:[4] Graft manipulation (removal of T cells). Stem cell source (slow recovery with cord blood). Chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). Figure  1 illustrates the immune defects, contributing transplant-related factors, and types and timing of infections that occur after allogeneic transplant.[5] Bacterial infections tend to occur in the first few weeks after transplant during the neutropenic phase, when mucosal barriers are damaged from the conditioning regimen. There is significant ongoing research into the role of prophylactic antibacterial medications during the neutropenic phase.[6] Guidelines for prevention of infections after HSCT have been established by a joint effort of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Infectious Disease Society of America, and the American Society of Transplantation and Cellular Therapy.[7] Approaches include preventive or prophylactic antivirals, antifungals, and antibiotics; escalation to heightened empiric therapy for signs of infection; and continued careful monitoring through the full duration of the immunocompromised period after HSCT. Prophylaxis against fungal infections is standard during the first several months after transplant and may be considered for patients with chronic GVHD who are at high risk of fungal infection. Antifungal prophylaxis must be tailored to the patient's underlying immune status.  Pneumocystis infections can occur in all patients after bone marrow transplants, and prophylaxis is mandatory.[6]; [8][Level of evidence C1] After HSCT, viral infections can be a major source of mortality, especially after T-cell–depleted or cord blood procedures.  Types of viral infections include the following: Cytomegalovirus (CMV). CMV infection has been a major cause of mortality in the past, but today, effective drugs to treat CMV are available. In addition, preventive strategies, including quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) monitoring followed by preemptive therapy with ganciclovir, have been developed. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). EBV rarely causes lymphoproliferative disease and is generally associated with intensive, multidrug GVHD therapy or T-cell–depleted HSCT. Adenovirus. Adenovirus infection is a major issue in T-cell–depleted transplant, and monitoring by quantitative blood PCR followed by therapy with cidofovir or brincidofovir (available through a compassionate-use protocol) has led to a major decrease in morbidity.[9] Other. Other viruses have been implicated in hemorrhagic cystitis (BK virus), encephalitis and poor count recovery (human herpes virus 6), and other clinical issues.[6] One study suggested that high BK viral loads early after transplant (4–7 weeks) may be associated with long-term decreases in glomerular filtration rate.[10] Careful viral monitoring is essential during high-risk allogeneic procedures. Late bacterial infections can occur in patients who have central lines or patients with significant chronic GVHD. These patients are susceptible to infection with encapsulated organisms, particularly pneumococcus. Despite reimmunization, these patients can sometimes develop significant infections, and continued prophylaxis is recommended until a serological response to immunizations has been documented. Occasionally, postallogeneic HSCT patients can become functionally asplenic, and antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended.  Patients should remain on infection prophylaxis (e.g., Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia  prophylaxis) until immune recovery.  Time to immune recovery varies but ranges from 3 months to 9 months after autologous HSCT, and 9 months to 24 months after allogeneic HSCT without GVHD.  Patients with active chronic GVHD may have persistent immunosuppression for years.  Many centers monitor T-cell subset recovery after bone marrow transplants as a guide to infection risk.[6] International transplant and infectious disease groups have developed specific guidelines for the administration of vaccines after autologous and allogeneic transplant.[6,11,12]  Comparative studies aimed at defining ideal timing of vaccination after transplant have not been performed, but the vaccine guidelines outlined in Table 2 result in protective titers in most patients who receive vaccinations. These guidelines recommend that autologous transplant recipients receive immunizations beginning at 6 months after stem cell infusion and receive live vaccines 24 months after the transplant.  Patients undergoing allogeneic procedures can begin immunizations as soon as 6 months after transplant. However, many groups prefer to wait either until 12 months after the procedure for patients who continue to receive immunosuppressive drugs or until patients are no longer receiving immunosuppressants. Vaccination recommendations should be reconsidered at times of local endemic or epidemic disease outbreaks. In those settings, earlier vaccination with killed vaccines may be implemented, acknowledging limited host responses. Pathologically, SOS/VOD of the liver is the result of damage to the hepatic sinusoids, resulting in biliary obstruction.  This syndrome has been estimated to occur in 15% to 40% of pediatric myeloablative transplant patients.[14,15] Risk factors for SOS/VOD include the following:[14,15] Use of busulfan (especially before therapeutic pharmacokinetic monitoring). Total-body irradiation. Serious infection. GVHD. Pre-existing liver dysfunction caused by hepatitis or iron overload. SOS/VOD is defined clinically by the following: Right upper quadrant pain with hepatomegaly. Fluid retention (weight gain and ascites). Hyperbilirubinemia. Life-threatening SOS/VOD generally occurs soon after transplant and is characterized by multiorgan system failure.[16] Milder, reversible forms can occur, with full recovery expected.  Pediatric patients who have severe SOS/VOD without increased bilirubin have been reported;[17] therefore, it is important to be vigilant  about monitoring patients who have other symptoms without increased bilirubin. Approaches to both prevention and treatment with agents such as heparin, protein C, and antithrombin III have been studied, with mixed results.[18] One small, retrospective, single-center study showed a benefit from corticosteroid therapy, but further validation is needed.[19] Another agent with demonstrated activity is defibrotide, a mixture of oligonucleotides with antithrombotic and fibrinolytic effects on microvascular endothelium.  Studies of defibrotide have shown the following: Decreased mortality in patients who were treated with defibrotide for severe SOS/VOD, compared with historical controls.[20-23]; [24][Level of evidence C1] Decreased SOS/VOD mortality associated with the early initiation of defibrotide treatment soon after diagnostic criteria for SOS/VOD were met.[25][Level of evidence B4] Efficacy in decreasing SOS/VOD incidence when used prophylactically.[26][Level of evidence A1] However, a second study was closed due to a lack of efficacy, bringing the validity of prophylactic defibrotide use into question.[27] Defibrotide is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of patients who have hepatic SOS/VOD with renal or pulmonary dysfunction after HSCT. The British Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (BSBMT) published evidence-guided recommendations for the diagnosis and management of SOS/VOD.[23] They recommend that biopsy be reserved for difficult cases and be performed using the transjugular approach. The BSBMT supports the use of defibrotide for the prevention of SOS/VOD (defibrotide prophylaxis is not currently part of the FDA indication) but maintains there is insufficient data to support the use of prostaglandin E1, pentoxifylline, or antithrombin. For treatment of SOS/VOD, they recommend aggressive fluid balance management, early involvement of critical care and gastroenterology specialists, and the use of defibrotide and possibly methylprednisolone. However, they concluded there is insufficient evidence to support the use of tissue plasminogen activator or N-acetylcysteine.[23,28] More detailed consensus recommendations for the diagnosis and management of SOS/VOD in children after HSCT have been published by the Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplant Consortium, which worked with the Pediatric Acute Lung Injury and Sepsis Investigators.[29-31] Although TA-TMA clinically mirrors hemolytic uremic syndrome, its causes and clinical course differ from those of other hemolytic uremic syndrome–like diseases. Studies have linked this syndrome with dysregulation of complement pathways.[32]   TA-TMA has most frequently been associated with the use of the calcineurin inhibitors tacrolimus and cyclosporine, and it has been noted to occur more frequently when either of these medications is used in combination with sirolimus.[33] Diagnostic criteria for this syndrome have been standardized and include the following:[34] Presence of schistocytes on a peripheral smear. Increased lactic dehydrogenase (LDH). Decreased haptoglobin. Thrombocytopenia with or without anemia. Suggestive symptoms consistent with, but not necessary for, the diagnosis include a sudden worsening of renal function or neurologic symptoms. Evidence (impact of TA-TMA on HSCT outcomes): A multicenter study of TA-TMA in pediatric patients used the following definition of TA-TMA:[35]Histologic evidence of TA-TMA, orPresence of at least four of the following laboratory and clinical markers diagnostic for TA-TMA:LDH levels above reference value for age.Schistocytes on peripheral blood smear.De novo thrombocytopenia or requirement for platelet transfusions.De novo anemia or requirement for red blood cell transfusions.Hypertension greater than 99% for age (aged <18 years) or 140/90 mm Hg (aged ≥18 years) requiring ≥2 antihypertensive agents.Proteinuria ≥30 mg/dL on random urine analysis twice or random urine protein/creatinine ratio >1 mg/mg.Terminal complement activation: Elevated plasma sC5b-9 above normal limit (≥244 ng/mL). This study demonstrated the following results:In 614 sequential patients who underwent allogeneic or autologous HSCT, 19% of allogeneic recipients and 10% of autologous recipients developed TA-TMA.  Patients who developed TA-TMA had increased rates of acute GVHD and steroid-refractory GVHD, intensive care unit admission, invasive ventilation, pericardial effusions, pulmonary hypertension, dialysis or continuous renal replacement therapy, acute kidney injury, and VOD. In patients who underwent allogeneic HSCT, treatment-related mortality during the first 6 months was significantly higher in patients with TA-TMA than in those without TA-TMA (20% vs. 3%; P ≤ .0001).  In patients who underwent autologous HSCT, the overall survival (OS) rate during the first 6 months was significantly lower in patients with TA-TMA than in those without TA-TMA (79% vs.  98%; P = .001). Histologic evidence of TA-TMA, or Presence of at least four of the following laboratory and clinical markers diagnostic for TA-TMA:LDH levels above reference value for age.Schistocytes on peripheral blood smear.De novo thrombocytopenia or requirement for platelet transfusions.De novo anemia or requirement for red blood cell transfusions.Hypertension greater than 99% for age (aged <18 years) or 140/90 mm Hg (aged ≥18 years) requiring ≥2 antihypertensive agents.Proteinuria ≥30 mg/dL on random urine analysis twice or random urine protein/creatinine ratio >1 mg/mg.Terminal complement activation: Elevated plasma sC5b-9 above normal limit (≥244 ng/mL). This study demonstrated the following results:In 614 sequential patients who underwent allogeneic or autologous HSCT, 19% of allogeneic recipients and 10% of autologous recipients developed TA-TMA.  Patients who developed TA-TMA had increased rates of acute GVHD and steroid-refractory GVHD, intensive care unit admission, invasive ventilation, pericardial effusions, pulmonary hypertension, dialysis or continuous renal replacement therapy, acute kidney injury, and VOD. In patients who underwent allogeneic HSCT, treatment-related mortality during the first 6 months was significantly higher in patients with TA-TMA than in those without TA-TMA (20% vs. 3%; P ≤ .0001).  In patients who underwent autologous HSCT, the overall survival (OS) rate during the first 6 months was significantly lower in patients with TA-TMA than in those without TA-TMA (79% vs.  98%; P = .001). LDH levels above reference value for age. Schistocytes on peripheral blood smear. De novo thrombocytopenia or requirement for platelet transfusions. De novo anemia or requirement for red blood cell transfusions. Hypertension greater than 99% for age (aged <18 years) or 140/90 mm Hg (aged ≥18 years) requiring ≥2 antihypertensive agents. Proteinuria ≥30 mg/dL on random urine analysis twice or random urine protein/creatinine ratio >1 mg/mg. Terminal complement activation: Elevated plasma sC5b-9 above normal limit (≥244 ng/mL). In 614 sequential patients who underwent allogeneic or autologous HSCT, 19% of allogeneic recipients and 10% of autologous recipients developed TA-TMA. Patients who developed TA-TMA had increased rates of acute GVHD and steroid-refractory GVHD, intensive care unit admission, invasive ventilation, pericardial effusions, pulmonary hypertension, dialysis or continuous renal replacement therapy, acute kidney injury, and VOD. In patients who underwent allogeneic HSCT, treatment-related mortality during the first 6 months was significantly higher in patients with TA-TMA than in those without TA-TMA (20% vs. 3%; P ≤ .0001). In patients who underwent autologous HSCT, the overall survival (OS) rate during the first 6 months was significantly lower in patients with TA-TMA than in those without TA-TMA (79% vs.  98%; P = .001). Treatment for TA-TMA includes the following: Cessation of the calcineurin inhibitor and substitution with other immune suppressants, if necessary. Careful management of hypertension and renal damage by dialysis, if necessary. Prognosis for normalization of kidney function when disease is caused by calcineurin inhibitors alone is generally poor; however, most TA-TMA that is associated with the combination of a calcineurin inhibitor and sirolimus has been reversed after sirolimus is discontinued, and in some cases, after both medications are stopped.[33] Some evidence suggests a role for complement modulation (c5, eculizumab therapy) in preserving renal function. Further assessment of the role of this medication in treating this complication is ongoing.[36-38] Although there are no randomized or prospective trials that used eculizumab to treat TA-TMA, there are published data from retrospective institutional and multicenter studies. Historically, the 1-year survival rate for untreated patients with TA-TMA was about 20%.[39] A single-center study showed a 1-year OS rate of 66% with eculizumab treatment.[39] A multicenter study reported a 6-month OS rate of 47% with eculizumab treatment.[40] IPS is characterized by diffuse, noninfectious lung injury that occurs from 14 to 90 days after the infusion of donor cells.  Possible etiologies include direct toxic effects of conditioning regimens and occult infection leading to secretion of high levels of inflammatory cytokines into the alveoli.[41] The incidence of this complication appears to be decreasing, possibly because of less intensive preparative regimens, better HLA matching, and better definition of occult infections through PCR  testing of blood and bronchioalveolar specimens. Mortality rates of 50% to 70% have been reported;[41] however, these estimates are from the mid-1990s, and outcomes may have improved. Diagnostic criteria include the following signs and symptoms in the absence of documented infectious organisms:[42] Pneumonia. Evidence of nonlobar radiographic infiltrates. Abnormal pulmonary function. Early assessment by bronchioalveolar lavage to rule out infection is important. The traditional therapy for IPS has been high-dose methylprednisolone and pulmonary support. Etanercept is a soluble fusion protein that joins the extracellular ligand-binding domain of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF)–alpha receptor to the Fc region of the immunoglobulin G1 antibody. It acts by blocking TNF-alpha signaling. The addition of etanercept to steroid therapies has shown promising short-term outcomes (extubation, improved short-term survival) in single-center studies.[43] A large phase II trial of this approach in pediatric patients showed promising results, with OS rates of 89% at 1 month and 63% at 12 months.[44] AIC after allogeneic HSCT can be restricted to one cell lineage (e.g., autoimmune hemolytic anemia), two cell lineages, or three cell lineages. Most data about AIC in pediatric patients after HSCT are reported from single-center experiences, with the number of cases ranging from 20 to 30, over a 10- to 20-year period.[45-47] The incidence of AIC is about 5% after allogeneic HSCT. Risk factors for developing AIC seem to be age younger than 10 years and having a nonmalignant disease as an HSCT indication.  At least one study has identified use of serotherapy, use of cord blood as the donor source, and severe GVHD as risk factors, but this finding has not been confirmed in other studies. One study demonstrated that patients who develop AIC have inferior outcomes compared with patients who did not develop AIC.[47]  However, other studies did not demonstrate an inferior outcome.[45,46] The most common first-line therapy for AIC has been corticosteroids.[45-47]  This treatment is effective in only 15% of patients, and additional immunosuppression or B-cell targeting monoclonal antibodies have been used. Intravenous immunoglobulin is used frequently as adjunct treatment for AIC and/or immunoglobulin replacement. After HSCT, EBV infection incidence increases through childhood, from approximately 40% in children aged 4 years to more than 80% in teenagers.  Patients with a history of previous EBV infection are at risk of EBV reactivation when undergoing HSCT procedures that result in intense, prolonged lymphopenia (T-cell–depleted procedures, use of antithymocyte globulin or alemtuzumab, and, to a lesser degree, use of cord blood).[48-50] Features of EBV reactivation can vary, from an isolated increase in EBV titers in the bloodstream as measured by PCR to an aggressive monoclonal disease with marked lymphadenopathy presenting as lymphoma (lymphoproliferative disorder). Isolated bloodstream reactivation of EBV can improve in some cases without therapy as immune function improves; however, lymphoproliferative disorder requires more aggressive therapy. Treatment of EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorder has relied on decreasing immune suppression and treatment with chemotherapy agents such as cyclophosphamide.  CD20-positive EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorder and EBV reactivation have been shown to respond to therapy with the CD20 monoclonal antibody therapy rituximab.[51-53]  In addition, some centers have shown efficacy in treating or preventing this complication with therapeutic or prophylactic EBV-specific cytotoxic T cells.[54,55] Improved understanding of the risk of EBV reactivation, early monitoring, and aggressive therapy have significantly decreased the risk of mortality from this challenging complication. GVHD is the result of immunologic activation of donor lymphocytes targeting major or minor HLA disparities present in the tissues of a recipient.[56]  Acute GVHD usually occurs within the first 3 months posttransplant, although delayed acute GVHD has been noted in reduced-intensity conditioning and nonmyeloablative approaches where achieving a high level of full donor chimerism is sometimes delayed. Typically, acute GVHD presents with at least one of the following three manifestations: Skin rash. Hyperbilirubinemia. Secretory diarrhea. Acute GVHD is classified by staging the severity of skin, liver, and gastrointestinal involvement and further combining the individual staging of these three areas into an overall grade that is prognostically significant (see Tables  3 and 4).[57] Patients with grade III or grade IV acute GVHD are at higher risk of mortality, generally resulting from organ system damage caused by infections or progressive acute GVHD that is sometimes resistant to therapy. Because of variation in outcomes of patients with different grades of acute GVHD, investigators have sought to define a more precise determination of acute GVHD risk based on serum biomarkers.  A study that included both adults and children used a score calculated on the basis of the levels of a combination of three biomarkers (tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 [TNFR1], suppression of tumorigenicity 2 [ST2], and regenerating islet-derived 3-alpha [REG3-alpha]) measured at the onset of acute GVHD. Investigators were able to define patients with low (8%), intermediate (27%), and high (46%, P < .0001) risk of 6-month mortality.  The biomarker score was more sensitive and specific for predicting survival than clinical staging.[59] Additional refining of the prediction algorithm showed that measurement of only two biomarkers (ST2 and REG3-alpha) reliably predicted outcome.  In addition, after 4 weeks of therapy, changes in the biomarker score were able to further refine prediction of survival outcomes.[60] These findings have led to several studies targeting biomarker high-risk or low-risk subsets of patients with acute GVHD and are influencing clinicians regarding the timing and intensity of acute GVHD therapies. Morbidity and mortality from acute GVHD can be reduced through immune suppressive medications given prophylactically or T-cell depletion of grafts, either ex vivo by actual removal of cells from a graft or in vivo with antilymphocyte antibodies (antithymocyte globulin or anti-CD52 [alemtuzumab]). Complete elimination of acute GVHD with intense T-cell depletion has generally resulted in increased relapse, more infectious morbidity, and increased EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorder.  Because of this result, most HSCT GVHD prophylaxis attempts to balance risk by giving sufficient immune suppression to prevent severe acute GVHD but not completely remove GVHD risk. Approaches to GVHD prevention in non–T-cell-depleted grafts have included the following:[61,62]; [63][Level of evidence C1] Intermittent methotrexate. Calcineurin inhibitor  (e.g., cyclosporine or tacrolimus). Combination of a calcineurin inhibitor with methotrexate (currently the most commonly used approach in pediatrics). Various combinations of a calcineurin inhibitor with steroids or mycophenolate mofetil. Non–calcineurin inhibitor (intensive T-cell depletion, posttransplant cyclophosphamide, etc.). Non–calcineurin inhibitor approaches have been developed and are becoming more widely used. When significant acute GVHD occurs, first-line therapy is generally methylprednisolone.[64]  Patients with acute GVHD who are resistant to this therapy have a poor prognosis, but a good percentage of cases respond to second-line agents (e.g., mycophenolate mofetil, infliximab, pentostatin, sirolimus, or extracorporeal photopheresis).[65]  Ruxolitinib was approved in 2019 for the treatment of children aged 12 years and older with steroid-refractory acute GVHD, with an overall response rate of 55% and a complete response rate of 27% at day 28 after initiation of therapy.  Comparative trials of these agents have not been performed; therefore, a best option for steroid-refractory GVHD has not been identified.[66,67] Antin JH: Immune reconstitution: the major barrier to successful stem cell transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 11 (2 Suppl 2): 43-5, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Fry TJ, Mackall CL: Immune reconstitution following hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation: challenges for the future. Bone Marrow Transplant 35 (Suppl 1): S53-7, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Wingard JR, Majhail NS, Brazauskas R, et al.: Long-term survival and late deaths after allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation. J Clin Oncol 29 (16): 2230-9, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Bunin N, Small T, Szabolcs P, et al.: NCI, NHLBI/PBMTC first international conference on late effects after pediatric hematopoietic cell transplantation: persistent immune deficiency in pediatric transplant survivors. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 18 (1): 6-15, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Burik JH, Freifeld AG: Infection in the severely
immunocompromised
patient. In: Abeloff MD, Armitage JO, Niederhuber JE, et al.: Clinical Oncology. 3rd ed. Elsevier, Churchill Livingstone, 2004, pp 941-56. Tomblyn M, Chiller T, Einsele H, et al.: Guidelines for preventing infectious complications among hematopoietic cell transplantation recipients: a global perspective. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 15 (10): 1143-238, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Infectious Disease Society of America, American Society of Blood and Marrow Transplantation: Guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. MMWR Recomm Rep 49 (RR-10): 1-125, CE1-7, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Levy ER, Musick L, Zinter MS, et al.: Safe and Effective Prophylaxis with Bimonthly Intravenous Pentamidine in the Pediatric Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant Population. Pediatr Infect Dis J 35 (2): 135-41, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Hiwarkar P, Amrolia P, Sivaprakasam P, et al.: Brincidofovir is highly efficacious in controlling adenoviremia in pediatric recipients of hematopoietic cell transplant. Blood 129 (14): 2033-2037, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Wychera C, Imlay HN, Duke ER, et al.: BK Viremia and Changes in Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate in Children and Young Adults after Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation. Transplant Cell Ther 29 (3): 187.e1-187.e8, 2023. [PUBMED Abstract] Rubin LG, Levin MJ, Ljungman P, et al.: 2013 IDSA clinical practice guideline for vaccination of the immunocompromised host. Clin Infect Dis 58 (3): e44-100, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Cordonnier C, Einarsdottir S, Cesaro S, et al.: Vaccination of haemopoietic stem cell transplant recipients: guidelines of the 2017 European Conference on Infections in Leukaemia (ECIL 7). Lancet Infect Dis 19 (6): e200-e212, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Kumar D, Chen MH, Welsh B, et al.: A randomized, double-blind trial of pneumococcal vaccination in adult allogeneic stem cell transplant donors and recipients. Clin Infect Dis 45 (12): 1576-82, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Reiss U, Cowan M, McMillan A, et al.: Hepatic venoocclusive disease in blood and bone marrow transplantation in children and young adults: incidence, risk factors, and outcome in a cohort of 241 patients. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 24 (9): 746-50, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Cesaro S, Pillon M, Talenti E, et al.: A prospective survey on incidence, risk factors and therapy of hepatic veno-occlusive disease in children after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Haematologica 90 (10): 1396-404, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Bearman SI: The syndrome of hepatic veno-occlusive disease after marrow transplantation. Blood 85 (11): 3005-20, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Myers KC, Dandoy C, El-Bietar J, et al.: Veno-occlusive disease of the liver in the absence of elevation in bilirubin in pediatric patients after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 21 (2): 379-81, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Ruutu T, Eriksson B, Remes K, et al.: Ursodeoxycholic acid for the prevention of hepatic complications in allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Blood 100 (6): 1977-83, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Myers KC, Lawrence J, Marsh RA, et al.: High-dose methylprednisolone for veno-occlusive disease of the liver in pediatric hematopoietic stem cell transplantation recipients. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 19 (3): 500-3, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Richardson PG, Murakami C, Jin Z, et al.: Multi-institutional use of defibrotide in 88 patients after stem cell transplantation with severe veno-occlusive disease and multisystem organ failure: response without significant toxicity in a high-risk population and factors predictive of outcome. Blood 100 (13): 4337-43, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Corbacioglu S, Kernan N, Lehmann L, et al.: Defibrotide for the treatment of hepatic veno-occlusive disease in children after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Expert Rev Hematol 5 (3): 291-302, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Richardson PG, Soiffer RJ, Antin JH, et al.: Defibrotide for the treatment of severe hepatic veno-occlusive disease and multiorgan failure after stem cell transplantation: a multicenter, randomized, dose-finding trial. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 16 (7): 1005-17, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Dignan FL, Wynn RF, Hadzic N, et al.: BCSH/BSBMT guideline: diagnosis and management of veno-occlusive disease (sinusoidal obstruction syndrome) following haematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Br J Haematol 163 (4): 444-57, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Strouse C, Richardson P, Prentice G, et al.: Defibrotide for Treatment of Severe Veno-Occlusive Disease in Pediatrics and Adults: An Exploratory Analysis Using Data from the Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 22 (7): 1306-1312, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Richardson PG, Smith AR, Triplett BM, et al.: Earlier defibrotide initiation post-diagnosis of veno-occlusive disease/sinusoidal obstruction syndrome improves Day +100 survival following haematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Br J Haematol 178 (1): 112-118, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Corbacioglu S, Cesaro S, Faraci M, et al.: Defibrotide for prophylaxis of hepatic veno-occlusive disease in paediatric haemopoietic stem-cell transplantation: an open-label, phase 3, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 379 (9823): 1301-9, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Grupp SA, Corbacioglu S, Kang HJ, et al.: Defibrotide plus best standard of care compared with best standard of care alone for the prevention of sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (HARMONY): a randomised, multicentre, phase 3 trial. Lancet Haematol 10 (5): e333-e345, 2023. [PUBMED Abstract] Ruutu T, Juvonen E, Remberger M, et al.: Improved survival with ursodeoxycholic acid prophylaxis in allogeneic stem cell transplantation: long-term follow-up of a randomized study. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 20 (1): 135-8, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Bajwa RPS, Mahadeo KM, Taragin BH, et al.: Consensus Report by Pediatric Acute Lung Injury and Sepsis Investigators and Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplantation Consortium Joint Working Committees: Supportive Care Guidelines for Management of Veno-Occlusive Disease in Children and Adolescents, Part 1: Focus on Investigations, Prophylaxis, and Specific Treatment. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 23 (11): 1817-1825, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Mahadeo KM, McArthur J, Adams RH, et al.: Consensus Report by the Pediatric Acute Lung Injury and Sepsis Investigators and Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplant Consortium Joint Working Committees on Supportive Care Guidelines for Management of Veno-Occlusive Disease in Children and Adolescents: Part 2-Focus on Ascites, Fluid and Electrolytes, Renal, and Transfusion Issues. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 23 (12): 2023-2033, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Ovchinsky N, Frazier W, Auletta JJ, et al.: Consensus Report by the Pediatric Acute Lung Injury and Sepsis Investigators and Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplantation Consortium Joint Working Committees on Supportive Care Guidelines for Management of Veno-Occlusive Disease in Children and Adolescents, Part 3: Focus on Cardiorespiratory Dysfunction, Infections, Liver Dysfunction, and Delirium. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 24 (2): 207-218, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Jodele S, Licht C, Goebel J, et al.: Abnormalities in the alternative pathway of complement in children with hematopoietic stem cell transplant-associated thrombotic microangiopathy. Blood 122 (12): 2003-7, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Cutler C, Henry NL, Magee C, et al.: Sirolimus and thrombotic microangiopathy after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 11 (7): 551-7, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Ho VT, Cutler C, Carter S, et al.: Blood and marrow transplant clinical trials network toxicity committee consensus summary: thrombotic microangiopathy after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 11 (8): 571-5, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Dandoy CE, Rotz S, Alonso PB, et al.: A pragmatic multi-institutional approach to understanding transplant-associated thrombotic microangiopathy after stem cell transplant. Blood Adv 5 (1): 1-11, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Jodele S, Fukuda T, Vinks A, et al.: Eculizumab therapy in children with severe hematopoietic stem cell transplantation-associated thrombotic microangiopathy. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 20 (4): 518-25, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Jodele S, Fukuda T, Mizuno K, et al.: Variable Eculizumab Clearance Requires Pharmacodynamic Monitoring to Optimize Therapy for Thrombotic Microangiopathy after Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 22 (2): 307-315, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Schoettler M, Lehmann L, Li A, et al.: Thrombotic Microangiopathy Following Pediatric Autologous Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation: A Report of Significant End-Organ Dysfunction in Eculizumab-Treated Survivors. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 25 (5): e163-e168, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Jodele S, Dandoy CE, Lane A, et al.: Complement blockade for TA-TMA: lessons learned from a large pediatric cohort treated with eculizumab. Blood 135 (13): 1049-1057, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] Svec P, Elfeky R, Galimard JE, et al.: Use of eculizumab in children with allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplantation associated thrombotic microangiopathy - a multicentre retrospective PDWP and IEWP EBMT study. Bone Marrow Transplant 58 (2): 129-141, 2023. [PUBMED Abstract] Kantrow SP, Hackman RC, Boeckh M, et al.: Idiopathic pneumonia syndrome: changing spectrum of lung injury after marrow transplantation. Transplantation 63 (8): 1079-86, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Clark JG, Hansen JA, Hertz MI, et al.: NHLBI workshop summary. Idiopathic pneumonia syndrome after bone marrow transplantation. Am Rev Respir Dis 147 (6 Pt 1): 1601-6, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Yanik GA, Ho VT, Levine JE, et al.: The impact of soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor etanercept on the treatment of idiopathic pneumonia syndrome after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Blood 112 (8): 3073-81, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Yanik GA, Grupp SA, Pulsipher MA, et al.: TNF-receptor inhibitor therapy for the treatment of children with idiopathic pneumonia syndrome. A joint Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplant Consortium and Children's Oncology Group Study (ASCT0521). Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 21 (1): 67-73, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Szanto CL, Langenhorst J, de Koning C, et al.: Predictors for Autoimmune Cytopenias after Allogeneic Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation in Children. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 26 (1): 114-122, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] Koo J, Giller RH, Quinones R, et al.: Autoimmune cytopenias following allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant in pediatric patients: Response to therapy and late effects. Pediatr Blood Cancer 67 (9): e28591, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] O'Brien TA, Eastlund T, Peters C, et al.: Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia complicating haematopoietic cell transplantation in paediatric patients: high incidence and significant mortality in unrelated donor transplants for non-malignant diseases. Br J Haematol 127 (1): 67-75, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Gerritsen EJ, Stam ED, Hermans J, et al.: Risk factors for developing EBV-related B cell lymphoproliferative disorders (BLPD) after non-HLA-identical BMT in children. Bone Marrow Transplant 18 (2): 377-82, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Shapiro RS, McClain K, Frizzera G, et al.: Epstein-Barr virus associated B cell lymphoproliferative disorders following bone marrow transplantation. Blood 71 (5): 1234-43, 1988. [PUBMED Abstract] Brunstein CG, Weisdorf DJ, DeFor T, et al.: Marked increased risk of Epstein-Barr virus-related complications with the addition of antithymocyte globulin to a nonmyeloablative conditioning prior to unrelated umbilical cord blood transplantation. Blood 108 (8): 2874-80, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Blaes AH, Cao Q, Wagner JE, et al.: Monitoring and preemptive rituximab therapy for Epstein-Barr virus reactivation after antithymocyte globulin containing nonmyeloablative conditioning for umbilical cord blood transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 16 (2): 287-91, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Kuehnle I, Huls MH, Liu Z, et al.: CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab) for therapy of Epstein-Barr virus lymphoma after hemopoietic stem-cell transplantation. Blood 95 (4): 1502-5, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Styczynski J, Gil L, Tridello G, et al.: Response to rituximab-based therapy and risk factor analysis in Epstein Barr Virus-related lymphoproliferative disorder after hematopoietic stem cell transplant in children and adults: a study from the Infectious Diseases Working Party of the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Clin Infect Dis 57 (6): 794-802, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Liu Z, Savoldo B, Huls H, et al.: Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes for the prevention and treatment of EBV-associated post-transplant lymphomas. Recent Results Cancer Res 159: 123-33, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Bollard CM, Heslop HE: T cells for viral infections after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant. Blood 127 (26): 3331-40, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Ferrara JL, Levine JE, Reddy P, et al.: Graft-versus-host disease. Lancet 373 (9674): 1550-61, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Przepiorka D, Weisdorf D, Martin P, et al.: 1994 Consensus Conference on Acute GVHD Grading. Bone Marrow Transplant 15 (6): 825-8, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Harris AC, Young R, Devine S, et al.: International, Multicenter Standardization of Acute Graft-versus-Host Disease Clinical Data Collection: A Report from the Mount Sinai Acute GVHD International Consortium. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 22 (1): 4-10, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Levine JE, Braun TM, Harris AC, et al.: A prognostic score for acute graft-versus-host disease based on biomarkers: a multicentre study. Lancet Haematol 2 (1): e21-9, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Srinagesh HK, Özbek U, Kapoor U, et al.: The MAGIC algorithm probability is a validated response biomarker of treatment of acute graft-versus-host disease. Blood Adv 3 (23): 4034-4042, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Kanakry CG, O'Donnell PV, Furlong T, et al.: Multi-institutional study of post-transplantation cyclophosphamide as single-agent graft-versus-host disease prophylaxis after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation using myeloablative busulfan and fludarabine conditioning. J Clin Oncol 32 (31): 3497-505, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Bertaina A, Merli P, Rutella S, et al.: HLA-haploidentical stem cell transplantation after removal of αβ+ T and B cells in children with nonmalignant disorders. Blood 124 (5): 822-6, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Jacoby E, Chen A, Loeb DM, et al.: Single-Agent Post-Transplantation Cyclophosphamide as Graft-versus-Host Disease Prophylaxis after Human Leukocyte Antigen-Matched Related Bone Marrow Transplantation for Pediatric and Young Adult Patients with Hematologic Malignancies. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 22 (1): 112-8, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Jacobsohn DA: Acute graft-versus-host disease in children. Bone Marrow Transplant 41 (2): 215-21, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Deeg HJ: How I treat refractory acute GVHD. Blood 109 (10): 4119-26, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Jagasia M, Perales MA, Schroeder MA, et al.: Ruxolitinib for the treatment of steroid-refractory acute GVHD (REACH1): a multicenter, open-label phase 2 trial. Blood 135 (20): 1739-1749, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] Laisne L, Neven B, Dalle JH, et al.: Ruxolitinib in children with steroid-refractory acute graft-versus-host disease: A retrospective multicenter study of the pediatric group of SFGM-TC. Pediatr Blood Cancer 67 (9): e28233, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] Organ Manifestations of Chronic GVHD Risk Factors for Chronic GVHD Treatment of Chronic GVHD Chronic GVHD is a syndrome that may involve a single organ system or several organ systems, with clinical features resembling an autoimmune disease.[1,2]  Chronic GVHD is usually first noted 2 to 12 months after hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT). Traditionally, symptoms occurring more than 100 days after HSCT were considered chronic GVHD, and symptoms occurring sooner than 100 days after HSCT were considered acute GVHD.  Because some approaches to HSCT can lead to late-onset acute GVHD, and manifestations that are diagnostic for chronic GVHD can occur sooner than 100 days post-HSCT, the following three distinct types of chronic GVHD have been described: Classic chronic GVHD: Occurs with diagnostic and/or distinct features of chronic GVHD (see Tables 5–9) after a previous history of resolved acute GVHD. Overlap syndrome: An ongoing GVHD process when manifestations diagnostic for chronic GVHD occur while symptoms of acute GVHD persist. De novo chronic GVHD: New-onset GVHD generally occurring at least 2 months after transplant, with diagnostic and/or distinct features of chronic GVHD and no history or features of acute GVHD. The diagnosis of chronic GVHD is based on clinical features (at least one diagnostic clinical sign, e.g., poikiloderma) or distinctive manifestations complemented by relevant tests (e.g., dry eye with positive results of a Schirmer test).[3] The tissues that are commonly involved include the skin, eyes, mouth, hair, joints, liver, and gastrointestinal tract. Other tissues such as lungs, nails, muscles, urogenital system, and nervous system may also be involved. Tables 5 to 9 list organ manifestations of chronic GVHD, including a description of findings that are sufficient to establish the diagnosis of chronic GVHD.  Biopsies of affected sites may be needed to confirm the diagnosis.[4] Common skin manifestations include alterations in pigmentation, texture, elasticity, and thickness, with papules, plaques, or follicular changes. Patient-reported symptoms include dry skin, itching, limited mobility, rash, sores, or changes in coloring or texture. Generalized scleroderma may lead to severe joint contractures and debility.  Associated hair loss and nail changes are common.  Other important symptoms that should be assessed include dry eyes and oral changes such as atrophy, ulcers, and lichen planus.  In addition, joint stiffness along with restricted range of motion, weight loss, nausea, difficulty swallowing, and diarrhea should be noted. Chronic GVHD occurs in approximately 15% to 30% of children after sibling-donor HSCT [5] and in 20% to 45% of children after unrelated-donor HSCT, with a higher risk associated with peripheral blood stem cells (PBSCs) and a lower risk associated with cord blood and selected approaches to haploidentical HSCT.[6-8] Risk factors for the development of chronic GVHD include the following:[5,9,10] Patient’s age (older than 10 years). Type of donor (unrelated and mismatched donors). Use of PBSCs. History of acute GVHD. Conditioning regimen (myeloablative and total-body irradiation (TBI)–based regimens). Several factors have been associated with increased risk of nonrelapse mortality in children who develop significant chronic GVHD.  Children who received HLA-mismatched grafts, received PBSCs, were older than 10 years, or had platelet counts lower than 100,000/µL at diagnosis of chronic GVHD have an increased risk of nonrelapse mortality. Nonrelapse mortality was 17% at 1 year, 22% at 3 years, and 24% at 5 years after diagnosis of chronic GVHD.  Many of these children required long-term immune suppression.  By 3 years after diagnosis of chronic GVHD, about a third of children had died of either relapse or nonrelapse mortality, a third were off immune suppression, and a third still required some form of immune suppressive therapy.[11] Older literature describes chronic GVHD as either limited or extensive.  A National Institutes of Health (NIH) Consensus Workshop in 2006 broadened the description of chronic GVHD to three categories to better predict long-term outcomes.[12]   The three NIH grading categories are as follows:[3] Mild disease: Involving only one or two sites, with no significant functional impairment (maximum severity score of 1  on a scale of 0 to 3). Moderate disease: Either involving more sites (>2) or associated with higher severity score (maximum score of 2 in any site). Severe disease: Indicating major disability (a score of 3 in any site or a lung score of 2). Thus, high-risk patients include those with severe disease of any site or extensive involvement of multiple sites, especially those with the following: Symptomatic lung involvement. Skin involvement greater than 50%. Platelet count lower than 100,000/µL. Poor performance score (<60%). Weight loss of more than 15%. Chronic diarrhea. Progressive-onset chronic GVHD. History of steroid treatment with more than 0.5 mg/kg of prednisone per day for acute GVHD. One study demonstrated a much higher chance of long-term GVHD-free survival and lower treatment-related mortality in children with mild and moderate chronic GVHD than in  children with severe chronic GVHD.  At 8 years, the probability of continued chronic GVHD in children with mild, moderate, and severe chronic GVHD was 4%, 11%, and 36%, respectively.[13] In another large prospective trial with central review that used the NIH consensus criteria, about 28% of patients were misclassified as having chronic GVHD when they actually had late-acute GVHD.  Additionally, there were significant challenges when using the NIH consensus criteria for bronchiolitis obliterans in children.[14] Steroids remain the cornerstone of chronic GVHD therapy; however, many approaches have been developed to minimize steroid dosing, including the use of calcineurin inhibitors.[15]  Topical therapy to affected areas is preferred for patients with limited disease.[16]  The following agents have been tested with some success: Mycophenolate mofetil.[17] Pentostatin.[18] Sirolimus.[19] Rituximab.[20] Ibrutinib.[21] Other approaches, including extracorporeal photopheresis, have been evaluated and show some efficacy in some patients.[22] Besides significantly  affecting organ function, quality of life, and functional status, infection is the major cause of chronic GVHD–related death.  Therefore, all patients with chronic GVHD receive prophylaxis against Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, common encapsulated organisms, and varicella by using agents such as trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, penicillin, and acyclovir. Transplant-related complications account for 70% of the deaths in patients with chronic GVHD.[5]  Guidelines concerning ancillary therapy and supportive care of patients with chronic GVHD have been published.[16,23] Shlomchik WD, Lee SJ, Couriel D, et al.: Transplantation's greatest challenges: advances in chronic graft-versus-host disease. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 13 (1 Suppl 1): 2-10, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Bolaños-Meade J, Vogelsang GB: Chronic graft-versus-host disease. Curr Pharm Des 14 (20): 1974-86, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Filipovich AH, Weisdorf D, Pavletic S, et al.: National Institutes of Health consensus development project on criteria for clinical trials in chronic graft-versus-host disease: I. Diagnosis and staging working group report. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 11 (12): 945-56, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Shulman HM, Kleiner D, Lee SJ, et al.: Histopathologic diagnosis of chronic graft-versus-host disease: National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Project on Criteria for Clinical Trials in Chronic Graft-versus-Host Disease: II. Pathology Working Group Report. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 12 (1): 31-47, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Zecca M, Prete A, Rondelli R, et al.: Chronic graft-versus-host disease in children: incidence, risk factors, and impact on outcome. Blood 100 (4): 1192-200, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Eapen M, Logan BR, Confer DL, et al.: Peripheral blood grafts from unrelated donors are associated with increased acute and chronic graft-versus-host disease without improved survival. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 13 (12): 1461-8, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Eapen M, Rubinstein P, Zhang MJ, et al.: Outcomes of transplantation of unrelated donor umbilical cord blood and bone marrow in children with acute leukaemia: a comparison study. Lancet 369 (9577): 1947-54, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Bertaina A, Zecca M, Buldini B, et al.: Unrelated donor vs HLA-haploidentical α/β T-cell- and B-cell-depleted HSCT in children with acute leukemia. Blood 132 (24): 2594-2607, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Leung W, Ahn H, Rose SR, et al.: A prospective cohort study of late sequelae of pediatric allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Medicine (Baltimore) 86 (4): 215-24, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Arora M, Klein JP, Weisdorf DJ, et al.: Chronic GVHD risk score: a Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research analysis. Blood 117 (24): 6714-20, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Jacobsohn DA, Arora M, Klein JP, et al.: Risk factors associated with increased nonrelapse mortality and with poor overall survival in children with chronic graft-versus-host disease. Blood 118 (16): 4472-9, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Pavletic SZ, Martin P, Lee SJ, et al.: Measuring therapeutic response in chronic graft-versus-host disease: National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Project on Criteria for Clinical Trials in Chronic Graft-versus-Host Disease: IV. Response Criteria Working Group report. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 12 (3): 252-66, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Inagaki J, Moritake H, Nishikawa T, et al.: Long-Term Morbidity and Mortality in Children with Chronic Graft-versus-Host Disease Classified by National Institutes of Health Consensus Criteria after Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 21 (11): 1973-80, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Cuvelier GDE, Nemecek ER, Wahlstrom JT, et al.: Benefits and challenges with diagnosing chronic and late acute GVHD in children using the NIH consensus criteria. Blood 134 (3): 304-316, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Koc S, Leisenring W, Flowers ME, et al.: Therapy for chronic graft-versus-host disease: a randomized trial comparing cyclosporine plus prednisone versus prednisone alone. Blood 100 (1): 48-51, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Couriel D, Carpenter PA, Cutler C, et al.: Ancillary therapy and supportive care of chronic graft-versus-host disease: national institutes of health consensus development project on criteria for clinical trials in chronic Graft-versus-host disease: V. Ancillary Therapy and Supportive Care Working Group Report. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 12 (4): 375-96, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Martin PJ, Storer BE, Rowley SD, et al.: Evaluation of mycophenolate mofetil for initial treatment of chronic graft-versus-host disease. Blood 113 (21): 5074-82, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Jacobsohn DA, Gilman AL, Rademaker A, et al.: Evaluation of pentostatin in corticosteroid-refractory chronic graft-versus-host disease in children: a Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplant Consortium study. Blood 114 (20): 4354-60, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Jurado M, Vallejo C, Pérez-Simón JA, et al.: Sirolimus as part of immunosuppressive therapy for refractory chronic graft-versus-host disease. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 13 (6): 701-6, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Cutler C, Miklos D, Kim HT, et al.: Rituximab for steroid-refractory chronic graft-versus-host disease. Blood 108 (2): 756-62, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Miklos D, Cutler CS, Arora M, et al.: Ibrutinib for chronic graft-versus-host disease after failure of prior therapy. Blood 130 (21): 2243-2250, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] González Vicent M, Ramirez M, Sevilla J, et al.: Analysis of clinical outcome and survival in pediatric patients undergoing extracorporeal photopheresis for the treatment of steroid-refractory GVHD. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 32 (8): 589-93, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Carpenter PA, Kitko CL, Elad S, et al.: National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Project on Criteria for Clinical Trials in Chronic Graft-versus-Host Disease: V. The 2014 Ancillary Therapy and Supportive Care Working Group Report. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 21 (7): 1167-87, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] The highest incidence of mortality after HSCT occurs in the first 2 years and is mostly caused by relapse.  A study of late mortality (≥2 years posttransplant) in  children with malignancies who underwent HSCT showed that approximately 20% of the 479 patients who were alive at 2 years suffered a late death.  Late mortality in the allogeneic group was 15% (median follow-up, 10.0 years; range, 2.0–25.6 years), mainly caused by relapse (65%). A total of 26% of patients suffered a late death after autologous HSCT (median follow-up, 6.7 years; range, 2.0–22.2 years),[1] and recurrence of the primary malignancy accounted for 88% of these deaths.  Nonrelapse mortality,   death caused by chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), and secondary malignancies are less common in children. Another study reviewed the causes of late mortality after second allogeneic transplant.[2] Of the children who were alive and relapse free 1 year after a second HSCT, 55% remained alive at 10 years. The most common cause of mortality  between 1 and 10 years after HSCT in this group was relapse (77% of deaths), generally occurring in the first 3 years after transplant. The cumulative incidence of nonrelapse mortality for this cohort at 10 years was 10%. Chronic GVHD occurred in 43% of children in this study and was the leading cause of nonrelapse mortality. A study focused on late mortality after autologous HSCT in children showed that mortality rates remained elevated compared with those of the general population more than 10 years after the procedure, but they approached the rates of the general population at 15 years.  The study also showed a decrease in late mortality in the more current treatment eras (before 1990, 35.1%; 1990–1999, 25.6%; 2000–2010, 21.8%; P = .05).[3] Schechter T, Pole JD, Darmawikarta D, et al.: Late mortality after hematopoietic SCT for a childhood malignancy. Bone Marrow Transplant 48 (10): 1291-5, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Duncan CN, Majhail NS, Brazauskas R, et al.: Long-term survival and late effects among one-year survivors of second allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation for relapsed acute leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 21 (1): 151-8, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Holmqvist AS, Chen Y, Wu J, et al.: Late mortality after autologous blood or marrow transplantation in childhood: a Blood or Marrow Transplant Survivor Study-2 report. Blood 131 (24): 2720-2729, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Methodological Challenges in the Study of Late Effects After HSCT Cardiovascular System Late Effects Neurocognitive Late Effects Digestive System Late EffectsGastrointestinal, biliary, and pancreatic dysfunctionIron overload Endocrine System Late EffectsThyroid dysfunctionGrowth impairmentAbnormal body composition and metabolic syndromeSarcopenic obesity Musculoskeletal System Late EffectsLow bone mineral densityOsteonecrosis Reproductive System Late EffectsPubertal developmentFertility Respiratory System Late EffectsChronic pulmonary dysfunction Urinary System Late EffectsRenal disease Quality of LifeHealth-related quality of life (HRQL)Functional outcomes Published Guidelines for Long-Term Follow-Up Gastrointestinal, biliary, and pancreatic dysfunction Iron overload Thyroid dysfunction Growth impairment Abnormal body composition and metabolic syndrome Sarcopenic obesity Low bone mineral density Osteonecrosis Pubertal development Fertility Chronic pulmonary dysfunction Renal disease Health-related quality of life (HRQL) Functional outcomes Data from studies of child and adult survivors of HSCT have shown a significant impact of treatment-related exposures on survival and quality of life.[1]  In one study of patients who were alive 2 years after undergoing HSCT, survivors had a 9.9-fold increased risk of premature death compared with age- and sex-matched controls in the U.S. general population.[2] Another multicenter study showed that more than one-half of adult survivors who underwent HSCT during childhood would have a grade 3 or 4 chronic health issue. Survivors had an odds ratio (OR) of 15.1 compared with siblings.[3] Although the main cause of death in patients who have undergone HSCT is from relapse of the primary disease, a sizeable number of these patients die from infections related to graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), second malignancies, or cardiac or pulmonary issues.[2,4-6] In addition, other studies have revealed that up to 40% of HSCT survivors experience severe, disabling, and/or life-threatening events or die because of an adverse event associated with primary or previous cancer treatment.[7,8] Before studies aimed at decreasing the incidence and severity of these effects are initiated, it is important to understand what leads to the development of these complications: Pretransplant therapy: Pretransplant therapy plays an important role, but the details of  significant exposures associated with pre-HSCT therapy are not included in many studies.[9] Preparative regimen: The transplant preparative regimen itself, including total-body irradiation (TBI) and high-dose chemotherapy, has often been studied, but this intense therapy is only a small part of a long course of therapy filled with potential causes of late effects. Allogenicity: The effect of allogenicity—differences in major and minor HLA antigens that lead to GVHD, autoimmunity, chronic inflammation, and, sometimes, undetected organ damage—also contributes to these late effects. Extended exposure to nonchemotherapeutic agents:  Transplant patients may receive immunosuppressants that have significant toxicity for an extended period of time (e.g., cyclosporine or tacrolimus, which can cause hypertension and kidney damage).  In addition, it is routine for patients to receive extended courses of supportive medications or antimicrobials that can be associated with organ damage (e.g., liposomal amphotericin B).  These medications should be considered when assessing the risk of late effects. Individuals differ in their susceptibility to specific organ damage from chemotherapy or in their risk of GVHD on the basis of genetic differences in both the donor and recipient.[9-11] Although cardiac dysfunction has been studied extensively in non-HSCT settings, less is known about the incidence and predictors of congestive heart failure following HSCT in childhood. Potentially cardiotoxic exposures unique to HSCT include the following:[12] Conditioning with high-dose chemotherapy, especially cyclophosphamide. TBI. HSCT survivors are at increased risk of developing cardiovascular risk factors such as hypertension and diabetes, partly as a result of exposure to TBI and  prolonged immunosuppressive therapy after allogeneic HSCT or related to other health conditions (e.g., hypothyroidism or growth hormone deficiency).[8,12] In a study of 661 pediatric patients who survived at least 2 years after allogeneic HSCT, 52% of patients had obesity or were overweight at their most recent examination, 18% of patients had dyslipidemia (associated with pre-HSCT anthracycline or cranial or chest irradiation), and 7% of patients were diagnosed with diabetes.[13] Rates of cardiovascular outcomes were examined among nearly 1,500 transplant survivors (surviving ≥2 years) who were treated in Seattle from 1985 to 2006. The survivors and a population-based comparison group were matched by age, year, and sex.[14] Survivors experienced increased rates of cardiovascular death (adjusted incidence rate difference, 3.6 per 1,000 person-years [95% confidence interval, 1.7–5.5]). Survivors also had an increased cumulative incidence of the following: Ischemic heart disease. Cardiomyopathy/heart failure. Stroke. Vascular diseases. Rhythm disorders. Survivors also had an increased cumulative incidence of related conditions that increased their risk of developing more serious cardiovascular disease (i.e., hypertension, renal disease, dyslipidemia, and diabetes).[14] In addition, cardiac function and pre-HSCT exposures to chemotherapy and radiation therapy have been shown to significantly impact post-HSCT cardiac function. In evaluating post-HSCT patients for long-term issues, it is important to consider levels of pre-HSCT anthracycline and chest irradiation.[15] Although more specific studies are needed to verify this approach, current evidence suggests that the risk of late-occurring cardiovascular complications after HSCT may largely result from pre-HSCT therapeutic exposures, with little additional risk from conditioning-related exposures or GVHD.[16,17] For more information, see the Late Effects of the Cardiovascular System section in Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. A preponderance of studies report normal neurodevelopment after HSCT, with no evidence of decline.[18-25] Researchers from St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital have reported on the largest longitudinal cohort to date, describing remarkable stability in global cognitive function and academic achievement during 5 years of posttransplant follow-up.[21-23] This research group reported poorer outcomes in patients who underwent unrelated-donor transplant when the patients received TBI and when they experienced GVHD. But these effects on outcomes were small compared with the much larger effects of socioeconomic status on cognitive function.[22] Most published studies report similar outcomes.  Normal cognitive function and academic achievement were reported in a cohort of 47 patients monitored prospectively through 2 years post-HSCT.[25] Stable cognitive function was also noted in a large cohort monitored from pretransplant to 2 years post-HSCT.[20] A smaller study reported similar normal functioning and the absence of declines over time in HSCT survivors.[18] HSCT survivors did not differ from their siblings in cognitive and academic function, with the exception that survivors performed better than siblings on measures of perceptual organization.[19] On the basis of the findings to date, it appears that HSCT poses low-to-minimal risk of late cognitive and academic deficits in survivors. A number of studies, however, have reported some decline in cognitive function after HSCT.[26-32] These studies tended to include samples with a high percentage of very young children. One study reported a significant decline in IQ in their cohort at 1 year post-HSCT, deficits that were maintained at 3 years post-HSCT.[27,28] Similarly, studies from Sweden have reported deficits in visual-spatial domains and executive functioning in very young children who underwent transplant with TBI.[30,31] Another study from St. Jude Children's Research Hospital reported that while all children younger than 3 years had a decline in IQ at 1 year after transplant, patients who did not receive TBI during conditioning recovered later.  Patients who received TBI had a significantly lower IQ at 5 years (P = .05) than did those who did not receive TBI.[32] For more information, see the Hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) section in Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. Most gastrointestinal late effects are related to protracted acute GVHD and chronic GVHD (see Table 10). For more information, see the Hepatobiliary section in Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. As GVHD is controlled and tolerance is developed, most symptoms resolve.  Major hepatobiliary concerns include the consequences of viral hepatitis acquired before or during the transplant, biliary stone disease, and focal liver lesions.[33] Viral serology and polymerase chain reaction should be performed to differentiate these from GVHD presenting with hepatocellular injury.[34] Iron overload occurs in almost all patients who undergo HSCT, especially if the procedure is for a condition associated with transfusion dependence before HSCT (e.g., thalassemia, bone marrow failure syndromes) or pre-HSCT treatments requiring transfusions after myelotoxic chemotherapy (e.g., acute leukemias).  Inflammatory conditions such as GVHD also increase gastrointestinal iron absorption.  Non-HSCT conditions leading to iron overload can lead to cardiac dysfunction, endocrine disorders (e.g., pituitary insufficiency, hypothyroidism), diabetes, neurocognitive effects, and second malignancies.[34] The effects of iron overload on morbidity post-HSCT have not been well studied; however, reducing iron levels after HSCT for thalassemia has been shown to improve cardiac function.[62] Although data supporting iron reduction therapies (such as phlebotomy or chelation after HSCT) have not identified specific levels at which iron reduction should be performed, higher levels of ferritin and/or evidence of significant iron overload by liver biopsy or T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [63] should be addressed by iron reduction therapy.[64] Studies show that rates of thyroid dysfunction  in children after myeloablative HSCT vary, with larger series reporting an average incidence of about 30%.[65-75]   A lower incidence in adults (on average, 15%) and a notable increase in incidence in children younger than 10 years who underwent HSCT suggest that a developing thyroid gland may be more susceptible to damage.[65,67,71,75] Pretransplant local thyroid radiation contributes to high rates of thyroid dysfunction in patients with Hodgkin lymphoma.[65]  Early studies showed very high rates of thyroid dysfunction after high single-dose fractions of TBI,[76] but traditional fractionated TBI/cyclophosphamide compared with busulfan/cyclophosphamide showed similar rates of thyroid dysfunction, suggesting a role for high-dose chemotherapy in thyroid damage.[68-70]  Notably, one large study showed that patients treated with either TBI or busulfan had similar high rates of thyroid dysfunction, while patients treated with treosulfan or reduced-intensity,  chemotherapy-based regimens had low rates of thyroid disease.[75] For more information, see the Posttransplant thyroid dysfunction section in Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. Higher rates of thyroid dysfunction occur with single-drug prophylaxis than with three-drug GVHD prophylaxis.[77] Increased rates of thyroid dysfunction occur after unrelated-donor HSCT than after  related-donor HSCT (36% vs. 9%),[66] suggesting a role for alloimmune damage in causing thyroid dysfunction.[70,78] Growth impairment is generally multifactorial.  Factors that play a role in failure to achieve expected adult height in young children who have undergone HSCT include the following: Diminished growth hormone level. Thyroid dysfunction. Disruption of pubertal sex hormone production. Steroid therapy. Poor nutritional status. The incidence of growth impairment varies from 20% to 80%, depending on age, risk factors, and the definition of growth impairment used by reporting groups.[72,73,79-82]  Risk factors include the following:[68,69,80,83] TBI. Cranial irradiation. Younger age. HSCT for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. HSCT occurring during a pubertal growth spurt.[84] Patients younger than 10 years at the time of HSCT are at the highest risk of growth impairment, but they also respond best to growth hormone replacement therapy. Early screening and referral of patients with signs of growth impairment to endocrinology specialists can result in significant restoration of height in younger children.[82] For more information, see the Growth hormone deficiency section in Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. After HSCT, adult survivors have a 2.3-fold higher risk of premature cardiovascular-related death compared with the general population.[85,86] The exact etiology of cardiovascular risk and subsequent death is largely unknown, although the development of metabolic syndrome (a constellation of central obesity, insulin resistance, glucose intolerance, dyslipidemia, and hypertension), especially insulin resistance, as a consequence of HSCT has been suggested.[87-89] In studies of conventionally treated leukemia survivors compared with those who underwent HSCT, transplant survivors are significantly more likely to manifest metabolic syndrome or multiple adverse cardiac risk factors, including central adiposity, hypertension, insulin resistance, and dyslipidemia.[34,90,91]  The concern over time is that survivors who develop metabolic syndrome after HSCT will be at higher risk of significant cardiovascular-related events and/or premature death from cardiovascular-related causes. For more information, see the Metabolic Syndrome section in Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. The association of obesity with diabetes and cardiovascular disease risk in the general population is well established, but obesity as determined by body mass index (BMI) is uncommon in long-term survivors after HSCT.[91]  However, despite having a normal BMI, HSCT survivors develop significantly altered body composition that results in both an increase in total percent fat mass and a reduction in lean body mass.  This finding, termed sarcopenic obesity, results in a loss of myocyte insulin receptors and an increase in adipocyte insulin receptors; the latter are less efficient in binding insulin and clearing glucose, ultimately contributing to insulin resistance.[92-94] Preliminary data from 119 children and young adult survivors and  81 healthy sibling controls found that HSCT survivors had significantly lower weight but no differences in BMI or waist circumference when compared with siblings.[95] HSCT survivors had a significantly higher percent fat mass and lower lean body mass than did controls. HSCT survivors were significantly more insulin resistant than were controls, and they also had a higher incidence of other cardiovascular risk factors, such as elevated total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and triglycerides. These differences were found only in patients who had received TBI as part of their transplant conditioning regimen. A limited number of studies have addressed low bone mineral density after HSCT in children.[96-102]  A significant portion of children experienced reduction in total-body bone mineral density  or lumbar Z-scores showing osteopenia (18%–33%) or osteoporosis (6%–21%).  Although general risk factors have been described (female sex, inactivity, poor nutritional status, White  or Asian ethnicity, family history, TBI, craniospinal irradiation, corticosteroid therapy, GVHD, cyclosporine, and endocrine deficiencies [e.g., growth hormone deficiency, hypogonadism]), most reported populations have been too small for multivariate analysis to test the relative importance of each factor.[103-113] Some studies in adults have shown improvement over time in low bone mineral density after HSCT;[101,114,115]  however, this has yet to be shown in children. Treatment for children has generally included a multifactorial approach, with vitamin D and calcium supplementation, minimization of corticosteroid therapy, participation in weight-bearing exercise, and resolution of other endocrine problems.  The role of bisphosphonate therapy in children with this condition is unclear. For more information, see the Osteoporosis and Fractures section in Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. Reported incidence of osteonecrosis  in children after HSCT has been 1% to 14%; however, these studies were retrospective and underestimated actual incidence because patients may have been asymptomatic early in the course of the disease.[116-118]  Two prospective studies showed an incidence of 30% and 44% with routine MRI screening of possible target joints.[100,119]  Osteonecrosis generally occurs within 3 years after HSCT, with a median onset of about 1 year. The most common locations include knees (30%–40%), hips (19%–24%), and shoulders (9%).  Most patients experience osteonecrosis in two or more joints.[76,116,120,121] In one prospective report, risk factors by multivariate analysis included age (markedly increased in children older than 10 years; OR,  7.4) and presence of osteonecrosis at the time of transplant. It is important to note that pre-HSCT factors such as corticosteroid exposure are very important in determining patient risk.  In this study, 14 of 44 children who developed osteonecrosis had the disease before HSCT.[119] A Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research (CIBMTR) retrospective nested control study of 160 cases and 478 control children suggested older age (>5 years), female sex, and the presence of chronic GVHD as risk factors for developing osteonecrosis.[122] Treatment has generally consisted of minimization of corticosteroid therapy and surgical joint replacement.  Most patients are not diagnosed until they present with symptoms.  In one study of 44 patients with osteonecrosis lesions in whom routine yearly MRI was performed, 4 resolved completely and 2 had resolution of one of multiply involved joints.[119]  The observation that some lesions can heal over time suggests caution in the surgical management of asymptomatic lesions. For more information, see the Osteonecrosis section in Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. Delayed, absent, or incomplete pubertal development commonly occurs after HSCT. Two studies showed pubertal delay or failure in 16% of female children who received cyclophosphamide alone, 72% of those who received busulfan/cyclophosphamide, and 57% of  those who underwent fractionated TBI. In males, incomplete pubertal development or failure was noted in 14% of those who received cyclophosphamide alone, 48% of those who received busulfan/cyclophosphamide, and 58% of those who underwent TBI.[74,123]  Boys who received more than 24 Gy of radiation to the testicles developed azoospermia and also experienced failure of testosterone production, requiring supplementation to develop secondary sexual characteristics.[124] Pretransplant and transplant cyclophosphamide exposure is the best-studied agent affecting fertility.  Postpubertal women younger than 30 years can tolerate up to 20 g/m2 of cyclophosphamide and have preserved ovarian function; prepubertal females can tolerate as much as 25 g/m2 to 30 g/m2.  Although the additional effect added by pretransplant exposures to cyclophosphamide and other agents has not been specifically quantitated in studies, these exposures plus transplant-related chemotherapy and radiation therapy lead to ovarian failure in 65% to 84% of females undergoing myeloablative HSCT.[125-128]  The use of cyclophosphamide, busulfan, and TBI as part of the preparative regimen are associated with worse ovarian function.  Younger age at the time of HSCT is associated with a higher chance of menarche and ovulation.[129,130] For more information, see the Ovarian function after HSCT section in Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. Studies of pregnancy are challenging because data seldom indicate whether individuals are trying to conceive.  Nonetheless, a large study of pregnancy in pediatric and adult survivors of myeloablative transplant demonstrated conception in 32 of 708 patients (4.5%).[125]  Of those trying to conceive, patients exposed to cyclophosphamide alone (total dose 6.7 g/m2 with no pretransplant exposure) had the best chance of conception (56 of 103, 54%), while those receiving myeloablative busulfan/cyclophosphamide (0 of 73, 0%) or TBI (7 of 532, 1.3%) had much lower rates of conception. The ability of men to produce functional sperm decreases with exposure to higher doses and specific types of chemotherapy.  Most men will become azoospermic at a cyclophosphamide dose of 300 mg/kg.[131]  After HSCT, 48% to 85% of men will experience gonadal failure.[125,131,132]  One study showed that men who received cyclophosphamide  conceived only 24% of the time, compared with 6.5% of men who received busulfan/cyclophosphamide and 1.3% of those who underwent TBI.[125] For more information, see the Testicular function after HSCT section in Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. On the basis of clear evidence of dose effect and the lowered gonadotoxicity of some reduced-toxicity chemotherapy regimens, the use of reduced-intensity, reduced-toxicity, or nonmyeloablative regimens will likely lead to a higher chance of preserved fertility after HSCT. Because use of these regimens is relatively new and mostly confined to older or sicker patients, most reports have consisted of single cases.  Registry reports are beginning to describe pregnancies after these procedures.[128] In addition, a single-center study compared myeloablative busulfan/cyclophosphamide with reduced-intensity fludarabine/melphalan.[133][Level of evidence C1] Spontaneous puberty occurred in 56% of girls and 89% of boys after busulfan/cyclophosphamide, whereas 90% of girls and all of the boys in the fludarabine/melphalan group entered puberty spontaneously (P = .012). Significantly more girls (61%) conditioned with busulfan/cyclophosphamide required hormone replacement than did girls in the fludarabine/melphalan group (10.5%; P = .012). In boys, no difference was noted between the two conditioning groups in time to follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) elevation (median, 4 years in the fludarabine/melphalan group vs. 6 years in the busulfan/cyclophosphamide group). While the two regimens have similar effects on testicular function, ovarian function seems to be better preserved in girls undergoing HSCT with reduced-intensity conditioning approaches. A second study compared serum concentrations of antimüllerian hormone (AMH) and inhibin B in 121 children who survived more than 1 year following a single HSCT and received a treosulfan-based regimen (treosulfan; low-toxicity), a fludarabine/melphalan regimen (Flu/Mel; reduced-intensity), or a busulphan/cyclophosphamide regimen (Bu/Cy; myeloablative). Mean age at HSCT was 3.6 years;  mean age at follow-up was 11.8 years. Mean length of follow-up was 9.9 years. Mean AMH standard deviation scores (SDS) were significantly higher after treosulfan (-1.047) and Flu/Mel (-1.255) than after Bu/Cy (-1.543), suggesting less ovarian reserve impairment after treosulfan and Flu/Mel than after Bu/Cy. Mean serum AMH concentration was significantly better with treosulfan (>1.0 μg/l) than with Flu/Mel or Bu/Cy. In males, mean inhibin B SDS was significantly higher after treosulfan (-0.506) than after Flu/Mel (-2.53) or some Bu/Cy (-1.23).  The authors concluded that treosulfan-based regimens may confer a more favorable outlook for gonadal reserve in both sexes than Flu/Mel or Bu/Cy regimens.[134] A third study compared gonadal function markers after myeloablative conditioning with Bu/Cy and cyclophosphamide/TBI regimens with a reduced-intensity conditioning regimen using fludarabine/melphalan/alemtuzumab.[135] Female patients who received reduced-intensity conditioning were less likely to develop primary ovarian insufficiency, as demonstrated by elevated FSH (P = .02) and low estradiol (P = .01) or elevated luteinizing hormone (P = .09). Most females in the reduced-intensity conditioning (75%) and myeloablative conditioning (93%) groups had low AMH levels, indicating low or absent ovarian reserve. In males, although median levels of inhibin B were higher after reduced-intensity conditioning, they were not significantly different between the two groups. Ten of 11 males who received reduced-intensity conditioning (91%) and all ten males who received myeloablative conditioning (100%) had azoospermia or oligospermia. The median time from HSCT to semen analysis was 3.7 years (range, 1.3–12.2 years). Many of these patients had pre-HSCT exposures to gonadotoxic drugs that were not taken into consideration in the analysis. Although this study was small, it provided evidence that risk of infertility after reduced-intensity conditioning regimens such as fludarabine/melphalan/alemtuzumab may be substantial. The following two forms of chronic pulmonary dysfunction are observed after HSCT:[136-141] Obstructive lung disease. Restrictive lung disease. The incidence of both forms of lung toxicity can range from 10% to 40%, depending on donor source, the time interval after HSCT, definition applied, and presence of chronic GVHD. In both conditions, collagen deposition and the development of fibrosis in either the interstitial space (restrictive lung disease) or the peribronchiolar space (obstructive lung disease) are believed to underlie the pathology.[142] The most common form of obstructive lung disease after allogeneic HSCT is bronchiolitis obliterans.[138,141,143,144] This condition is an inflammatory process resulting in bronchiolar obliteration, fibrosis, and progressive obstructive lung disease.[136] Historically, the term bronchiolitis obliterans has been used to describe chronic GVHD of the lung and begins 6 to 20 months after HSCT. Pulmonary function tests show obstructive lung disease with general preservation of forced vital capacity (FVC), reductions in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), and associated decreases in the FEV1/FVC ratio with or without significant declines in the diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO). Risk factors for bronchiolitis obliterans include the following:[136,143] Lower pretransplant FEV1/FVC values. Concomitant pulmonary infections. Chronic aspiration. Acute and chronic GVHD. Older recipient age. Use of mismatched donors. High-dose (vs. reduced-intensity) conditioning. The clinical course of bronchiolitis obliterans is variable, but patients frequently develop progressive and debilitating respiratory failure despite the initiation of enhanced immunosuppression. Standard treatment for obstructive lung disease combines enhanced immunosuppression with supportive care, including antimicrobial prophylaxis, bronchodilator therapy, and supplemental oxygen, when indicated.[145] The potential role for tumor necrosis factor-alpha in the pathogenesis of obstructive lung disease suggests that neutralizing agents such as etanercept may have promise.[146] Restrictive lung disease is defined by reductions in FVC, total lung capacity (TLC), and DLCO. In contrast to obstructive lung disease, the FEV1/FVC ratio is maintained near 100%. Restrictive lung disease is common after HSCT and has been reported in 25% to 45% of patients by day 100.[136] Importantly, declines in TLC or FVC occurring at 100 days and 1 year after HSCT are associated with an increase in nonrelapse mortality. Early reports suggested that the incidence of restrictive lung disease increases with advancing recipient age, but subsequent studies have revealed significant restrictive lung disease in children receiving HSCT.[147] The most recognizable form of restrictive lung disease is bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP), more recently called cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP). Clinical features include dry cough, shortness of breath, and fever. Radiographic findings show diffuse, peripheral, fluffy infiltrates consistent with airspace consolidation. Although reported in fewer than 10% of HSCT recipients, the development of BOOP/COP is strongly associated with previous acute and chronic GVHD.[142] Patients with restrictive lung disease have limited responses to multiple agents such as corticosteroids, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and azathioprine.[145] The potential role for tumor necrosis factor-alpha in the pathogenesis of restrictive lung disease suggests that neutralizing agents such as etanercept may have promise.[146] For more information, see the Respiratory complications associated with HSCT section in Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. Chronic kidney disease is frequently diagnosed after transplant. There are many clinical forms of chronic kidney disease, but the most commonly described ones include thrombotic microangiopathy, nephrotic syndrome, calcineurin inhibitor toxicity, acute kidney injury, and GVHD-related chronic kidney disease.  Various risk factors associated with the development of chronic kidney disease have been described; however, recent studies suggest that acute and chronic GVHD may be a proximal cause of renal injury.[34] In a systematic review of 9,317 adults and children from 28 cohorts who underwent HSCT, approximately 16.6% of patients (range, 3.6% to 89%) developed chronic kidney disease, defined as a decrease in estimated glomerular filtration rate of at least 24.5 mL/min/1.73 m2 within the first year after transplant.[148] The cumulative incidence of chronic kidney disease developing approximately 5 years after transplant ranged from 4.4% to 44.3%, depending on the type of transplant and stage of chronic kidney disease.[149,150] Mortality rates among patients with chronic kidney disease in this setting were higher than those in transplant recipients who retained normal renal function, even when studies controlled for comorbidities.[151] It is important to aggressively treat hypertension in patients post-HSCT, especially in those treated with prolonged courses of calcineurin inhibitors.  Whether post-HSCT patients with albuminuria and hypertension benefit from treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers requires further study, but careful control of hypertension with captopril, an ACE inhibitor, did show a benefit in a small study.[152] HRQL is a multidimensional construct, incorporating a subjective appraisal of one’s functioning and well-being, with reference to the impact of health issues on overall quality of life.[153,154] Many studies have shown that HRQL varies according to the following:[155] Time after HSCT: HRQL is worse with more recent HSCT. Transplant type: Unrelated-donor HSCT recipients have worse HRQL than do autologous or allogeneic related-donor HSCT recipients. Presence or absence of HSCT-related sequelae: HRQL is worse with chronic GVHD. Pre-HSCT factors, such as family cohesion and a child’s adaptive functioning, have been shown to affect HRQL.[156] Several groups have also identified the importance of pre-HSCT parenting stress on parental ratings of children’s HRQL post-HSCT.[156-160] A report of the trajectories of HRQL over the 12 months after HSCT noted that the poorest HRQL was seen at 3 months post-HSCT, with steady improvement thereafter. Recipients of unrelated-donor transplants had the steepest declines in HRQL from baseline to 3 months. Another study reported that compromised emotional functioning, high levels of worry, and reduced communication during the acute recovery period had a negative impact on HRQL at 1-year post-HSCT.[161] Longitudinal studies identified an association of the following additional baseline risk factors with the trajectory of HRQL after HSCT: Child's age: Older children had worse  HRQL.[156,162,163] Child's sex: Females had worse HRQL.[163] Rater: Mothers reported lower HRQL than did fathers; parents reported lower HRQL than did children.[164,165] Concordance by primary language or by sex of the raters: Concordant pairs reported higher HRQL.[166] Parental emotional distress: Greater parental distress led to worse HRQL.[162] Child's race: African American children had better HRQL.[163] A report that investigated the impact of specific HSCT complications indicated that HRQL was worse among children with severe end-organ toxicity, systemic infection, or GVHD.[157]  Cross-sectional studies reported that the HRQL among pediatric HSCT survivors of 5 years or longer was reasonably good, although psychological, cognitive, or physical problems appeared to negatively influence HRQL. Female sex, causal diagnosis for HSCT (e.g., acute myelogenous leukemia patients had worse HRQL), and intensity of pre-HSCT therapy were all identified as affecting HRQL post-HSCT.[167,168] Finally, another cross-sectional study of children 5 to 10 years post-HSCT cautioned that parental concerns about the child’s vulnerability may induce overprotective parenting.[160] Clinician reports of long-term disability among childhood HSCT survivors suggest that the prevalence and severity of functional loss is low, as described in the following studies: A study from the European Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation used the Karnofsky performance scale to report outcomes among 647 HSCT survivors (surviving ≥5 years).[169] In this cohort, 40% of survivors were younger than 18 years when they underwent transplant; only 19% had Karnofsky scores lower than 100.  Seven percent had scores lower than 80, defined as the inability to work.  Similar low rates of clinician-graded poor functional outcome were reported by two other groups.[167,170] Among 50 survivors of childhood allogeneic HSCT treated at the City of Hope National Medical Center and Stanford University Hospital, all had Karnofsky scores of 90 or 100.[170] Among 73 young adults (mean age, 26 years) treated at the Karolinska University Hospital,  the median Karnofsky score at 10 years post-HSCT was 90.[167] Self-reported and proxy data among survivors of childhood HSCT indicated similar low rates of functional loss in the following studies: One study evaluated 22 survivors of childhood allogeneic HSCT (mean age at HSCT, 11 years; mean age at questionnaire, 25 years) and reported no differences between survivors’ scores and population-expected values on standardized physical performance scales.[171] Another study compared a group of survivors who underwent transplant for childhood leukemia (n = 142) with a group of childhood leukemia survivors treated with chemotherapy alone (n = 288).[172] There were no differences between the groups on the physical function and leisure scales using multiple standardized measures. Other studies that have reported functional limitations include the following: In the Bone Marrow Transplant Survivors Study (BMTSS) that included 235 survivors of childhood HSCT, 17% reported long-term physical performance limitations, compared with 8.7% of a sibling comparison group.[173] A Seattle study evaluated physical function in 214 young adults (median age at questionnaire, 28.7 years; 118 males) who underwent transplant at a median age of 11.9 years.  When compared with age- and sex-matched controls, the HSCT survivors in this cohort scored one-half standard deviation lower on the physical component score of the SF-36 and the physical function and role physical subscales, quality-of-life measures.[168] A Swedish study also identified lower self-reported physical health among 73 young adult (median age, 26 years) HSCT survivors who were a median of 10 years after transplant.  HSCT survivors scored significantly below population normative values on physical functioning (90.2 for HSCT survivors vs. 95.3 for population), satisfaction with physical health (66.0 for HSCT survivors vs. 78.7 for population), and role limitation because of physical health (72.7 for HSCT survivors vs. 84.9 for population).[167] Objective measurements of function in the pediatric HSCT patient and survivor population hint that loss of physical capacity may be a bigger problem than revealed in studies that rely on clinician or self-report data.  Studies measuring cardiopulmonary fitness have observed the following: One study used exercise capacity with cycle ergometry in a group of 20 children and young adults before HSCT, 31 patients at 1 year post-HSCT, and 70 healthy controls.[174] The average peak oxygen consumption was 21 mL/kg/min in the pre-HSCT group, 24 mL/kg/min in the post-HSCT group, and 34 mL/kg/min in the healthy controls.  Among the HSCT survivors, 62% of those with cancer diagnoses scored in the lowest fifth percentile for peak oxygen consumption, compared with healthy controls. Another study examined exercise capacity with a Bruce treadmill protocol in 31 survivors of pediatric HSCT.  In this cohort, 25.8% of HSCT survivors had exercise capacities in the 70% to 79% of predicted category, and 41.9% had exercise capacities in the lower than 70% of predicted category.[175] A third study investigated exercise capacity among 33 HSCT survivors who underwent transplant at a mean age of 11.3 years. At 5 years post-HSCT, only 4 of 33 survivors scored above the 75th percentile on a serial cycle ergometry test.[176] The BMTSS found associations between poor physical performance outcomes and chronic GVHD, cardiac conditions, immune suppression, or treatment for a second malignant neoplasm.[177]  In a study from the Fred Hutchison Cancer Research Center, poor performance was associated with myeloid disease.[168] Several organizations have published consensus guidelines for follow-up for late effects after HSCT.  The CIBMTR, along with the American Society of Blood and Marrow Transplant (ASBMT), and in cooperation with five other international transplant groups, published consensus recommendations for screening and preventive practices for long-term survivors of HSCT.[178] Although some pediatric-specific challenges are addressed in these guidelines, many important pediatric issues are not.  Some of these issues have been partially covered by general guidelines published by the Children's Oncology Group (COG) and other children’s cancer groups (United Kingdom, Scotland, and Netherlands). The COG has also published more specific recommendations for late effects surveillance after HSCT.[179]  To address the lack of detailed, pediatric-specific, late-effects data and guidelines for long-term follow-up after HSCT, the Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplant Consortium (PBMTC) published six detailed papers outlining existing data and summarizing recommendations from key groups (CIBMTR/ASBMT, COG, and the United Kingdom), along with expert recommendations for pediatric-specific issues.[9,34,64,180-182] Although international efforts at further standardization and harmonization of pediatric-specific follow-up guidelines are under way, the PBMTC summary and guideline recommendations provide the most current outline for monitoring children for late effects after HSCT.[64] Sun CL, Francisco L, Kawashima T, et al.: Prevalence and predictors of chronic health conditions after hematopoietic cell transplantation: a report from the Bone Marrow Transplant Survivor Study. Blood 116 (17): 3129-39; quiz 3377, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Bhatia S, Francisco L, Carter A, et al.: Late mortality after allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation and functional status of long-term survivors: report from the Bone Marrow Transplant Survivor Study. Blood 110 (10): 3784-92, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Holmqvist AS, Chen Y, Hageman L, et al.: Severe, life-threatening, and fatal chronic health conditions after allogeneic blood or marrow transplantation in childhood. Cancer 129 (4): 624-633, 2023. [PUBMED Abstract] Bhatia S, Robison LL, Francisco L, et al.: Late mortality in survivors of autologous hematopoietic-cell transplantation: report from the Bone Marrow Transplant Survivor Study. Blood 105 (11): 4215-22, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Gooley TA, Chien JW, Pergam SA, et al.: Reduced mortality after allogeneic hematopoietic-cell transplantation. N Engl J Med 363 (22): 2091-101, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Martin PJ, Counts GW, Appelbaum FR, et al.: Life expectancy in patients surviving more than 5 years after hematopoietic cell transplantation. J Clin Oncol 28 (6): 1011-6, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Geenen MM, Cardous-Ubbink MC, Kremer LC, et al.: Medical assessment of adverse health outcomes in long-term survivors of childhood cancer. JAMA 297 (24): 2705-15, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Oeffinger KC, Mertens AC, Sklar CA, et al.: Chronic health conditions in adult survivors of childhood cancer. N Engl J Med 355 (15): 1572-82, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Bhatia S, Davies SM, Scott Baker K, et al.: NCI, NHLBI first international consensus conference on late effects after pediatric hematopoietic cell transplantation: etiology and pathogenesis of late effects after HCT performed in childhood--methodologic challenges. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 17 (10): 1428-35, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Behar E, Chao NJ, Hiraki DD, et al.: Polymorphism of adhesion molecule CD31 and its role in acute graft-versus-host disease. N Engl J Med 334 (5): 286-91, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Goodman RS, Ewing J, Evans PC, et al.: Donor CD31 genotype and its association with acute graft-versus-host disease in HLA identical sibling stem cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 36 (2): 151-6, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] van Dalen EC, van der Pal HJ, Kok WE, et al.: Clinical heart failure in a cohort of children treated with anthracyclines: a long-term follow-up study. Eur J Cancer 42 (18): 3191-8, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Duncan CN, Brazauskas R, Huang J, et al.: Late cardiovascular morbidity and mortality following pediatric allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 53 (10): 1278-1287, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Chow EJ, Mueller BA, Baker KS, et al.: Cardiovascular hospitalizations and mortality among recipients of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Ann Intern Med 155 (1): 21-32, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Armenian SH, Sun CL, Francisco L, et al.: Late congestive heart failure after hematopoietic cell transplantation. J Clin Oncol 26 (34): 5537-43, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Armenian SH, Sun CL, Mills G, et al.: Predictors of late cardiovascular complications in survivors of hematopoietic cell transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 16 (8): 1138-44, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Armenian SH, Sun CL, Kawashima T, et al.: Long-term health-related outcomes in survivors of childhood cancer treated with HSCT versus conventional therapy: a report from the Bone Marrow Transplant Survivor Study (BMTSS) and Childhood Cancer Survivor Study (CCSS). Blood 118 (5): 1413-20, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Arvidson J, Kihlgren M, Hall C, et al.: Neuropsychological functioning after treatment for hematological malignancies in childhood, including autologous bone marrow transplantation. Pediatr Hematol Oncol 16 (1): 9-21, 1999 Jan-Feb. [PUBMED Abstract] Barrera M, Atenafu E: Cognitive, educational, psychosocial adjustment and quality of life of children who survive hematopoietic SCT and their siblings. Bone Marrow Transplant 42 (1): 15-21, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Kupst MJ, Penati B, Debban B, et al.: Cognitive and psychosocial functioning of pediatric hematopoietic stem cell transplant patients: a prospective longitudinal study. Bone Marrow Transplant 30 (9): 609-17, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Phipps S, Brenner M, Heslop H, et al.: Psychological effects of bone marrow transplantation on children and adolescents: preliminary report of a longitudinal study. Bone Marrow Transplant 15 (6): 829-35, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Phipps S, Rai SN, Leung WH, et al.: Cognitive and academic consequences of stem-cell transplantation in children. J Clin Oncol 26 (12): 2027-33, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Phipps S, Dunavant M, Srivastava DK, et al.: Cognitive and academic functioning in survivors of pediatric bone marrow transplantation. J Clin Oncol 18 (5): 1004-11, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Cognitive functioning after BMT. In: Pot-Mees CC: The Psychological Effects of Bone Marrow Transplantation in Children. Eburon Delft, 1989, pp 96–103. Simms S, Kazak AE, Golomb V, et al.: Cognitive, behavioral, and social outcome in survivors of childhood stem cell transplantation. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 24 (2): 115-9, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Cool VA: Long-term neuropsychological risks in pediatric bone marrow transplant: what do we know? Bone Marrow Transplant 18 (Suppl 3): S45-9, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Kramer JH, Crittenden MR, DeSantes K, et al.: Cognitive and adaptive behavior 1 and 3 years following bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 19 (6): 607-13, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Kramer JH, Crittenden MR, Halberg FE, et al.: A prospective study of cognitive functioning following low-dose cranial radiation for bone marrow transplantation. Pediatrics 90 (3): 447-50, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Shah AJ, Epport K, Azen C, et al.: Progressive declines in neurocognitive function among survivors of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for pediatric hematologic malignancies. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 30 (6): 411-8, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Smedler AC, Bolme P: Neuropsychological deficits in very young bone marrow transplant recipients. Acta Paediatr 84 (4): 429-33, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Smedler AC, Winiarski J: Neuropsychological outcome in very young hematopoietic SCT recipients in relation to pretransplant conditioning. Bone Marrow Transplant 42 (8): 515-22, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Willard VW, Leung W, Huang Q, et al.: Cognitive outcome after pediatric stem-cell transplantation: impact of age and total-body irradiation. J Clin Oncol 32 (35): 3982-8, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] McDonald GB: Hepatobiliary complications of hematopoietic cell transplantation, 40 years on. Hepatology 51 (4): 1450-60, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Nieder ML, McDonald GB, Kida A, et al.: National Cancer Institute-National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute/pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplant Consortium First International Consensus Conference on late effects after pediatric hematopoietic cell transplantation: long-term organ damage and dysfunction. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 17 (11): 1573-84, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Mackey JR, Desai S, Larratt L, et al.: Myasthenia gravis in association with allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: clinical observations, therapeutic implications and review of literature. Bone Marrow Transplant 19 (9): 939-42, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Shimada K, Yokozawa T, Atsuta Y, et al.: Solid tumors after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in Japan: incidence, risk factors and prognosis. Bone Marrow Transplant 36 (2): 115-21, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] McDonald GB, Sullivan KM, Schuffler MD, et al.: Esophageal abnormalities in chronic graft-versus-host disease in humans. Gastroenterology 80 (5 pt 1): 914-21, 1981. [PUBMED Abstract] McDonald GB, Sullivan KM, Plumley TF: Radiographic features of esophageal involvement in chronic graft-vs.-host disease. AJR Am J Roentgenol 142 (3): 501-6, 1984. [PUBMED Abstract] Schima W, Pokieser P, Forstinger C, et al.: Videofluoroscopy of the pharynx and esophagus in chronic graft-versus-host disease. Abdom Imaging 19 (3): 191-4, 1994 May-Jun. [PUBMED Abstract] Minocha A, Mandanas RA, Kida M, et al.: Bullous esophagitis due to chronic graft-versus-host disease. Am J Gastroenterol 92 (3): 529-30, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Patey-Mariaud de Serre N, Reijasse D, Verkarre V, et al.: Chronic intestinal graft-versus-host disease: clinical, histological and immunohistochemical analysis of 17 children. Bone Marrow Transplant 29 (3): 223-30, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Akpek G, Chinratanalab W, Lee LA, et al.: Gastrointestinal involvement in chronic graft-versus-host disease: a clinicopathologic study. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 9 (1): 46-51, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Filipovich AH, Weisdorf D, Pavletic S, et al.: National Institutes of Health consensus development project on criteria for clinical trials in chronic graft-versus-host disease: I. Diagnosis and staging working group report. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 11 (12): 945-56, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] McDonald GB, Bouvier M, Hockenbery DM, et al.: Oral beclomethasone dipropionate for treatment of intestinal graft-versus-host disease: a randomized, controlled trial. Gastroenterology 115 (1): 28-35, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Hockenbery DM, Cruickshank S, Rodell TC, et al.: A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of oral beclomethasone dipropionate as a prednisone-sparing therapy for gastrointestinal graft-versus-host disease. Blood 109 (10): 4557-63, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Iyer RV, Hahn T, Roy HN, et al.: Long-term use of oral beclomethasone dipropionate for the treatment of gastrointestinal graft-versus-host disease. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 11 (8): 587-92, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Borgaonkar MR, Duggan PR, Adams G: Differing clinical manifestations of celiac disease transmitted by bone marrow transplantation. Dig Dis Sci 51 (1): 210-2, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Sullivan KM, Shulman HM, Storb R, et al.: Chronic graft-versus-host disease in 52 patients: adverse natural course and successful treatment with combination immunosuppression. Blood 57 (2): 267-76, 1981. [PUBMED Abstract] Tomás JF, Pinilla I, García-Buey ML, et al.: Long-term liver dysfunction after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: clinical features and course in 61 patients. Bone Marrow Transplant 26 (6): 649-55, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Strasser SI, Shulman HM, Flowers ME, et al.: Chronic graft-versus-host disease of the liver: presentation as an acute hepatitis. Hepatology 32 (6): 1265-71, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Malik AH, Collins RH, Saboorian MH, et al.: Chronic graft-versus-host disease after hematopoietic cell transplantation presenting as an acute hepatitis. Am J Gastroenterol 96 (2): 588-90, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Akpek G, Boitnott JK, Lee LA, et al.: Hepatitic variant of graft-versus-host disease after donor lymphocyte infusion. Blood 100 (12): 3903-7, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Shulman HM, Sharma P, Amos D, et al.: A coded histologic study of hepatic graft-versus-host disease after human bone marrow transplantation. Hepatology 8 (3): 463-70, 1988 May-Jun. [PUBMED Abstract] Strasser SI, Myerson D, Spurgeon CL, et al.: Hepatitis C virus infection and bone marrow transplantation: a cohort study with 10-year follow-up. Hepatology 29 (6): 1893-9, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Ljungman P, Johansson N, Aschan J, et al.: Long-term effects of hepatitis C virus infection in allogeneic bone marrow transplant recipients. Blood 86 (4): 1614-8, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Strasser SI, Sullivan KM, Myerson D, et al.: Cirrhosis of the liver in long-term marrow transplant survivors. Blood 93 (10): 3259-66, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Peffault de Latour R, Lévy V, Asselah T, et al.: Long-term outcome of hepatitis C infection after bone marrow transplantation. Blood 103 (5): 1618-24, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Ko CW, Murakami C, Sekijima JH, et al.: Chemical composition of gallbladder sludge in patients after marrow transplantation. Am J Gastroenterol 91 (6): 1207-10, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Akpek G, Valladares JL, Lee L, et al.: Pancreatic insufficiency in patients with chronic graft-versus-host disease. Bone Marrow Transplant 27 (2): 163-6, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Maringhini A, Gertz MA, DiMagno EP: Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Int J Pancreatol 17 (3): 243-7, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Radu B, Allez M, Gornet JM, et al.: Chronic diarrhoea after allogenic bone marrow transplantation. Gut 54 (1): 161, 174, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Mariotti E, Angelucci E, Agostini A, et al.: Evaluation of cardiac status in iron-loaded thalassaemia patients following bone marrow transplantation: improvement in cardiac function during reduction in body iron burden. Br J Haematol 103 (4): 916-21, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Angelucci E, Muretto P, Lucarelli G, et al.: Treatment of iron overload in the "ex-thalassemic". Report from the phlebotomy program. Ann N Y Acad Sci 850: 288-93, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Pulsipher MA, Skinner R, McDonald GB, et al.: National Cancer Institute, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute/Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplantation Consortium First International Consensus Conference on late effects after pediatric hematopoietic cell transplantation: the need for pediatric-specific long-term follow-up guidelines. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 18 (3): 334-47, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Sanders JE, Hoffmeister PA, Woolfrey AE, et al.: Thyroid function following hematopoietic cell transplantation in children: 30 years' experience. Blood 113 (2): 306-8, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Bailey HK, Kappy MS, Giller RH, et al.: Time-course and risk factors of hypothyroidism following allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) in children conditioned with fractionated total body irradiation. Pediatr Blood Cancer 51 (3): 405-9, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Ishiguro H, Yasuda Y, Tomita Y, et al.: Long-term follow-up of thyroid function in patients who received bone marrow transplantation during childhood and adolescence. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 89 (12): 5981-6, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Michel G, Socié G, Gebhard F, et al.: Late effects of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for children with acute myeloblastic leukemia in first complete remission: the impact of conditioning regimen without total-body irradiation--a report from the Société Française de Greffe de Moelle. J Clin Oncol 15 (6): 2238-46, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Afify Z, Shaw PJ, Clavano-Harding A, et al.: Growth and endocrine function in children with acute myeloid leukaemia after bone marrow transplantation using busulfan/cyclophosphamide. Bone Marrow Transplant 25 (10): 1087-92, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Slatter MA, Gennery AR, Cheetham TD, et al.: Thyroid dysfunction after bone marrow transplantation for primary immunodeficiency without the use of total body irradiation in conditioning. Bone Marrow Transplant 33 (9): 949-53, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Berger C, Le-Gallo B, Donadieu J, et al.: Late thyroid toxicity in 153 long-term survivors of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Bone Marrow Transplant 35 (10): 991-5, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Leung W, Ahn H, Rose SR, et al.: A prospective cohort study of late sequelae of pediatric allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Medicine (Baltimore) 86 (4): 215-24, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Dvorak CC, Wright NB, Wong WB, et al.: Safety of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in children less than three years of age. Pediatr Hematol Oncol 25 (8): 705-22, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Sanders JE, Woolfrey AE, Carpenter PA, et al.: Late effects among pediatric patients followed for nearly 4 decades after transplantation for severe aplastic anemia. Blood 118 (5): 1421-8, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Cattoni A, Molinari S, Gaiero A, et al.: Thyroid Disorders Following Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation in Childhood: Impact of Conditioning Regimen on Thyroid Dysfunction, Volume Changes, and Occurrence of Nodules. Transplant Cell Ther 28 (8): 506.e1-506.e12, 2022. [PUBMED Abstract] Socié G, Salooja N, Cohen A, et al.: Nonmalignant late effects after allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Blood 101 (9): 3373-85, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Katsanis E, Shapiro RS, Robison LL, et al.: Thyroid dysfunction following bone marrow transplantation: long-term follow-up of 80 pediatric patients. Bone Marrow Transplant 5 (5): 335-40, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Savani BN, Koklanaris EK, Le Q, et al.: Prolonged chronic graft-versus-host disease is a risk factor for thyroid failure in long-term survivors after matched sibling donor stem cell transplantation for hematologic malignancies. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 15 (3): 377-81, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Huma Z, Boulad F, Black P, et al.: Growth in children after bone marrow transplantation for acute leukemia. Blood 86 (2): 819-24, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Giorgiani G, Bozzola M, Locatelli F, et al.: Role of busulfan and total body irradiation on growth of prepubertal children receiving bone marrow transplantation and results of treatment with recombinant human growth hormone. Blood 86 (2): 825-31, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Cohen A, Rovelli A, Van-Lint MT, et al.: Final height of patients who underwent bone marrow transplantation during childhood. Arch Dis Child 74 (5): 437-40, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Sanders JE, Guthrie KA, Hoffmeister PA, et al.: Final adult height of patients who received hematopoietic cell transplantation in childhood. Blood 105 (3): 1348-54, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Cohen A, Rovelli A, Bakker B, et al.: Final height of patients who underwent bone marrow transplantation for hematological disorders during childhood: a study by the Working Party for Late Effects-EBMT. Blood 93 (12): 4109-15, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Eggleston B, Patience M, Edwards S, et al.: Effect of myeloablative bone marrow transplantation on growth in children with sickle cell anaemia: results of the multicenter study of haematopoietic cell transplantation for sickle cell anaemia. Br J Haematol 136 (4): 673-6, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Reusch JE: Current concepts in insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and the metabolic syndrome. Am J Cardiol 90 (5A): 19G-26G, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Trevisan M, Liu J, Bahsas FB, et al.: Syndrome X and mortality: a population-based study. Risk Factor and Life Expectancy Research Group. Am J Epidemiol 148 (10): 958-66, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Lakka HM, Laaksonen DE, Lakka TA, et al.: The metabolic syndrome and total and cardiovascular disease mortality in middle-aged men. JAMA 288 (21): 2709-16, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Taskinen M, Saarinen-Pihkala UM, Hovi L, et al.: Impaired glucose tolerance and dyslipidaemia as late effects after bone-marrow transplantation in childhood. Lancet 356 (9234): 993-7, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Baker KS, Ness KK, Steinberger J, et al.: Diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular events in survivors of hematopoietic cell transplantation: a report from the bone marrow transplantation survivor study. Blood 109 (4): 1765-72, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Eaton SB, Cordain L, Sparling PB: Evolution, body composition, insulin receptor competition, and insulin resistance. Prev Med 49 (4): 283-5, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Boirie Y: Physiopathological mechanism of sarcopenia. J Nutr Health Aging 13 (8): 717-23, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Baker KS, Chow E, Goodman P, et al.: Adverse Impact of hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) on body composition and insulin resistance (IR) is associated with increased cardiovascular risk. [Abstract] Biol Blood Marrow Transplant  17 (2 Suppl):  A-61, S174, 2011. Cook S, Weitzman M, Auinger P, et al.: Prevalence of a metabolic syndrome phenotype in adolescents: findings from the third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1988-1994. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 157 (8): 821-7, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Genuth S, Alberti KG, Bennett P, et al.: Follow-up report on the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care 26 (11): 3160-7, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Grundy SM, Brewer HB, Cleeman JI, et al.: Definition of metabolic syndrome: Report of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute/American Heart Association conference on scientific issues related to definition. Circulation 109 (3): 433-8, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Petryk A, Bergemann TL, Polga KM, et al.: Prospective study of changes in bone mineral density and turnover in children after hematopoietic cell transplantation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 91 (3): 899-905, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Bhatia S, Ramsay NK, Weisdorf D, et al.: Bone mineral density in patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation for myeloid malignancies. Bone Marrow Transplant 22 (1): 87-90, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Nysom K, Holm K, Michaelsen KF, et al.: Bone mass after allogeneic BMT for childhood leukaemia or lymphoma. Bone Marrow Transplant 25 (2): 191-6, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Daniels MW, Wilson DM, Paguntalan HG, et al.: Bone mineral density in pediatric transplant recipients. Transplantation 76 (4): 673-8, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Kaste SC, Shidler TJ, Tong X, et al.: Bone mineral density and osteonecrosis in survivors of childhood allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 33 (4): 435-41, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Perkins JL, Kunin-Batson AS, Youngren NM, et al.: Long-term follow-up of children who underwent hematopoeitic cell transplant (HCT) for AML or ALL at less than 3 years of age. Pediatr Blood Cancer 49 (7): 958-63, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Carpenter PA, Hoffmeister P, Chesnut CH, et al.: Bisphosphonate therapy for reduced bone mineral density in children with chronic graft-versus-host disease. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 13 (6): 683-90, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Weilbaecher KN: Mechanisms of osteoporosis after hematopoietic cell transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 6 (2A): 165-74, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Rodgers C, Monroe R: Osteopenia and osteoporosis in pediatric patients after stem cell transplant. J Pediatr Oncol Nurs 24 (4): 184-9, 2007 Jul-Aug. [PUBMED Abstract] McClune BL, Polgreen LE, Burmeister LA, et al.: Screening, prevention and management of osteoporosis and bone loss in adult and pediatric hematopoietic cell transplant recipients. Bone Marrow Transplant 46 (1): 1-9, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Schulte CM, Beelen DW: Bone loss following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: a long-term follow-up. Blood 103 (10): 3635-43, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Schimmer AD, Minden MD, Keating A: Osteoporosis after blood and marrow transplantation: clinical aspects. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 6 (2A): 175-81, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Banfi A, Podestà M, Fazzuoli L, et al.: High-dose chemotherapy shows a dose-dependent toxicity to bone marrow osteoprogenitors: a mechanism for post-bone marrow transplantation osteopenia. Cancer 92 (9): 2419-28, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Castañeda S, Carmona L, Carvajal I, et al.: Reduction of bone mass in women after bone marrow transplantation. Calcif Tissue Int 60 (4): 343-7, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Lee WY, Baek KH, Rhee EJ, et al.: Impact of circulating bone-resorbing cytokines on the subsequent bone loss following bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 34 (1): 89-94, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Baker KS, Gurney JG, Ness KK, et al.: Late effects in survivors of chronic myeloid leukemia treated with hematopoietic cell transplantation: results from the Bone Marrow Transplant Survivor Study. Blood 104 (6): 1898-906, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Stern JM, Sullivan KM, Ott SM, et al.: Bone density loss after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: a prospective study. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 7 (5): 257-64, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Ebeling PR, Thomas DM, Erbas B, et al.: Mechanisms of bone loss following allogeneic and autologous hemopoietic stem cell transplantation. J Bone Miner Res 14 (3): 342-50, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Tauchmanovà L, De Rosa G, Serio B, et al.: Avascular necrosis in long-term survivors after allogeneic or autologous stem cell transplantation: a single center experience and a review. Cancer 97 (10): 2453-61, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Kananen K, Volin L, Tähtelä R, et al.: Recovery of bone mass and normalization of bone turnover in long-term survivors of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 29 (1): 33-9, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Socié G, Cahn JY, Carmelo J, et al.: Avascular necrosis of bone after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: analysis of risk factors for 4388 patients by the Société Française de Greffe de Moëlle (SFGM). Br J Haematol 97 (4): 865-70, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Faraci M, Calevo MG, Lanino E, et al.: Osteonecrosis after allogeneic stem cell transplantation in childhood. A case-control study in Italy. Haematologica 91 (8): 1096-9, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Enright H, Haake R, Weisdorf D: Avascular necrosis of bone: a common serious complication of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Am J Med 89 (6): 733-8, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Sharma S, Yang S, Rochester R, et al.: Prevalence of osteonecrosis and associated risk factors in children before allogeneic BMT. Bone Marrow Transplant 46 (6): 813-9, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Bürger B, Beier R, Zimmermann M, et al.: Osteonecrosis: a treatment related toxicity in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)--experiences from trial ALL-BFM 95. Pediatr Blood Cancer 44 (3): 220-5, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Mattano LA, Sather HN, Trigg ME, et al.: Osteonecrosis as a complication of treating acute lymphoblastic leukemia in children: a report from the Children's Cancer Group. J Clin Oncol 18 (18): 3262-72, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Li X, Brazauskas R, Wang Z, et al.: Avascular necrosis of bone after allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation in children and adolescents. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 20 (4): 587-92, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Baker KS, Petryk A: Growth and development after hematopoietic cell transplantation. In: Appelbaum FR, Forman SJ, Negrin RS, et al., eds.: Thomas' Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation: Stem Cell Transplantation. 5th ed. John Wiley & Sons Inc., 2015, pp 1257-65. Sanders JE, Flournoy N, Thomas ED, et al.: Marrow transplant experience in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia: an analysis of factors associated with survival, relapse, and graft-versus-host disease. Med Pediatr Oncol 13 (4): 165-72, 1985. [PUBMED Abstract] Sanders JE, Hawley J, Levy W, et al.: Pregnancies following high-dose cyclophosphamide with or without high-dose busulfan or total-body irradiation and bone marrow transplantation. Blood 87 (7): 3045-52, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Carter A, Robison LL, Francisco L, et al.: Prevalence of conception and pregnancy outcomes after hematopoietic cell transplantation: report from the Bone Marrow Transplant Survivor Study. Bone Marrow Transplant 37 (11): 1023-9, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Salooja N, Szydlo RM, Socie G, et al.: Pregnancy outcomes after peripheral blood or bone marrow transplantation: a retrospective survey. Lancet 358 (9278): 271-6, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Loren AW, Chow E, Jacobsohn DA, et al.: Pregnancy after hematopoietic cell transplantation: a report from the late effects working committee of the Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research (CIBMTR). Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 17 (2): 157-66, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Shalet SM, Didi M, Ogilvy-Stuart AL, et al.: Growth and endocrine function after bone marrow transplantation. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 42 (4): 333-9, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Schubert MA, Sullivan KM, Schubert MM, et al.: Gynecological abnormalities following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 5 (6): 425-30, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Howell SJ, Shalet SM: Spermatogenesis after cancer treatment: damage and recovery. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr  (34): 12-7, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Anserini P, Chiodi S, Spinelli S, et al.: Semen analysis following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Additional data for evidence-based counselling. Bone Marrow Transplant 30 (7): 447-51, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Panasiuk A, Nussey S, Veys P, et al.: Gonadal function and fertility after stem cell transplantation in childhood: comparison of a reduced intensity conditioning regimen containing melphalan with a myeloablative regimen containing busulfan. Br J Haematol 170 (5): 719-26, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Leiper A, Houwing M, Davies EG, et al.: Anti-Müllerian hormone and Inhibin B after stem cell transplant in childhood: a comparison of myeloablative, reduced intensity and treosulfan-based chemotherapy regimens. Bone Marrow Transplant 55 (10): 1985-1995, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] Bender JD, Oquendo-Del Toro H, Benoit J, et al.: Reduced-Intensity Conditioning Mitigates Risk for Primary Ovarian Insufficiency but Does Not Decrease Risk for Infertility in Pediatric and Young Adult Survivors of Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation. Transplant Cell Ther 29 (2): 130.e1-130.e8, 2023. [PUBMED Abstract] Yoshihara S, Yanik G, Cooke KR, et al.: Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS), bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP), and other late-onset noninfectious pulmonary complications following allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 13 (7): 749-59, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Chien JW, Duncan S, Williams KM, et al.: Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation-an increasingly recognized manifestation of chronic graft-versus-host disease. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 16 (1 Suppl): S106-14, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Hildebrandt GC, Fazekas T, Lawitschka A, et al.: Diagnosis and treatment of pulmonary chronic GVHD: report from the consensus conference on clinical practice in chronic GVHD. Bone Marrow Transplant 46 (10): 1283-95, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Chien JW, Martin PJ, Gooley TA, et al.: Airflow obstruction after myeloablative allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 168 (2): 208-14, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Cerveri I, Zoia MC, Fulgoni P, et al.: Late pulmonary sequelae after childhood bone marrow transplantation. Thorax 54 (2): 131-5, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Uhlving HH, Bang CL, Christensen IJ, et al.: Lung function after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in children: a longitudinal study in a population-based cohort. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 19 (9): 1348-54, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Freudenberger TD, Madtes DK, Curtis JR, et al.: Association between acute and chronic graft-versus-host disease and bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia in recipients of hematopoietic stem cell transplants. Blood 102 (10): 3822-8, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Chien JW, Zhao LP, Hansen JA, et al.: Genetic variation in bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein influences the risk of developing rapid airflow decline after hematopoietic cell transplantation. Blood 107 (5): 2200-7, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Hildebrandt GC, Granell M, Urbano-Ispizua A, et al.: Recipient NOD2/CARD15 variants: a novel independent risk factor for the development of bronchiolitis obliterans after allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 14 (1): 67-74, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Cooke KR, Yanik G: Lung injury following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. In: Appelbaum FR, Forman SJ, Negrin RS, et al., eds.: Thomas' Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation: Stem Cell Transplantation. 5th ed. John Wiley & Sons Inc., 2015, pp 1156-69. Yanik GA, Mineishi S, Levine JE, et al.: Soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor: enbrel (etanercept) for subacute pulmonary dysfunction following allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 18 (7): 1044-54, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Norman BC, Jacobsohn DA, Williams KM, et al.: Fluticasone, azithromycin and montelukast therapy in reducing corticosteroid exposure in bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome after allogeneic hematopoietic SCT: a case series of eight patients. Bone Marrow Transplant 46 (10): 1369-73, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Ellis MJ, Parikh CR, Inrig JK, et al.: Chronic kidney disease after hematopoietic cell transplantation: a systematic review. Am J Transplant 8 (11): 2378-90, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Choi M, Sun CL, Kurian S, et al.: Incidence and predictors of delayed chronic kidney disease in long-term survivors of hematopoietic cell transplantation. Cancer 113 (7): 1580-7, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Ando M, Ohashi K, Akiyama H, et al.: Chronic kidney disease in long-term survivors of myeloablative allogeneic haematopoietic cell transplantation: prevalence and risk factors. Nephrol Dial Transplant 25 (1): 278-82, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Cohen EP, Piering WF, Kabler-Babbitt C, et al.: End-stage renal disease (ESRD)after bone marrow transplantation: poor survival compar ed to other causes of ESRD. Nephron 79 (4): 408-12, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Cohen EP, Irving AA, Drobyski WR, et al.: Captopril to mitigate chronic renal failure after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: a randomized controlled trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 70 (5): 1546-51, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Wilson IB, Cleary PD: Linking clinical variables with health-related quality of life. A conceptual model of patient outcomes. JAMA 273 (1): 59-65, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Eisen M, Donald CA, Ware JE, et al.: Conceptualization and Measurement of Health for Children in the Health Insurance Study. Rand Corporation, 1980. Parsons SK, Barlow SE, Levy SL, et al.: Health-related quality of life in pediatric bone marrow transplant survivors: according to whom? Int J Cancer Suppl 12: 46-51, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Barrera M, Atenafu E, Hancock K: Longitudinal health-related quality of life outcomes and related factors after pediatric SCT. Bone Marrow Transplant 44 (4): 249-56, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Parsons SK, Shih MC, Duhamel KN, et al.: Maternal perspectives on children's health-related quality of life during the first year after pediatric hematopoietic stem cell transplant. J Pediatr Psychol 31 (10): 1100-15, 2006 Nov-Dec. [PUBMED Abstract] Barrera M, Boyd-Pringle LA, Sumbler K, et al.: Quality of life and behavioral adjustment after pediatric bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 26 (4): 427-35, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Jobe-Shields L, Alderfer MA, Barrera M, et al.: Parental depression and family environment predict distress in children before stem cell transplantation. J Dev Behav Pediatr 30 (2): 140-6, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Vrijmoet-Wiersma CM, Kolk AM, Grootenhuis MA, et al.: Child and parental adaptation to pediatric stem cell transplantation. Support Care Cancer 17 (6): 707-14, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Felder-Puig R, di Gallo A, Waldenmair M, et al.: Health-related quality of life of pediatric patients receiving allogeneic stem cell or bone marrow transplantation: results of a longitudinal, multi-center study. Bone Marrow Transplant 38 (2): 119-26, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Parsons SK, Ratichek SJ, Rodday AM: Caring for the caregiver: eHealth interventions for parents of pediatric hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. [Abstract] Pediatr Blood Cancer  56 (7): 1157, 2011. Brice L, Weiss R, Wei Y, et al.: Health-related quality of life (HRQoL): the impact of medical and demographic variables upon pediatric recipients of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Pediatr Blood Cancer 57 (7): 1179-85, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Kaplan SH, Barlow S, Spetter D: Assessing functional status and health-related quality of life among school-aged children: reliability and validity of a new self-reported measure. [Abstract] Qual Life Res  4 (5): 444-45, 1995. Barrera M, Atenafu E, Doyle J, et al.: Differences in mothers' and fathers' health-related quality of life after pediatric SCT: a longitudinal study. Bone Marrow Transplant 47 (6): 855-9, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Feichtl RE, Rosenfeld B, Tallamy B, et al.: Concordance of quality of life assessments following pediatric hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Psychooncology 19 (7): 710-7, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Löf CM, Winiarski J, Giesecke A, et al.: Health-related quality of life in adult survivors after paediatric allo-SCT. Bone Marrow Transplant 43 (6): 461-8, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Sanders JE, Hoffmeister PA, Storer BE, et al.: The quality of life of adult survivors of childhood hematopoietic cell transplant. Bone Marrow Transplant 45 (4): 746-54, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Duell T, van Lint MT, Ljungman P, et al.: Health and functional status of long-term survivors of bone marrow transplantation. EBMT Working Party on Late Effects and EULEP Study Group on Late Effects. European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Ann Intern Med 126 (3): 184-92, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Schmidt GM, Niland JC, Forman SJ, et al.: Extended follow-up in 212 long-term allogeneic bone marrow transplant survivors. Issues of quality of life. Transplantation 55 (3): 551-7, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Helder DI, Bakker B, de Heer P, et al.: Quality of life in adults following bone marrow transplantation during childhood. Bone Marrow Transplant 33 (3): 329-36, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Michel G, Bordigoni P, Simeoni MC, et al.: Health status and quality of life in long-term survivors of childhood leukaemia: the impact of haematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 40 (9): 897-904, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Ness KK, Bhatia S, Baker KS, et al.: Performance limitations and participation restrictions among childhood cancer survivors treated with hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: the bone marrow transplant survivor study. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 159 (8): 706-13, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Larsen RL, Barber G, Heise CT, et al.: Exercise assessment of cardiac function in children and young adults before and after bone marrow transplantation. Pediatrics 89 (4 Pt 2): 722-9, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Eames GM, Crosson J, Steinberger J, et al.: Cardiovascular function in children following bone marrow transplant: a cross-sectional study. Bone Marrow Transplant 19 (1): 61-6, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Hogarty AN, Leahey A, Zhao H, et al.: Longitudinal evaluation of cardiopulmonary performance during exercise after bone marrow transplantation in children. J Pediatr 136 (3): 311-7, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Fraser CJ, Bhatia S, Ness K, et al.: Impact of chronic graft-versus-host disease on the health status of hematopoietic cell transplantation survivors: a report from the Bone Marrow Transplant Survivor Study. Blood 108 (8): 2867-73, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Rizzo JD, Wingard JR, Tichelli A, et al.: Recommended screening and preventive practices for long-term survivors after hematopoietic cell transplantation: joint recommendations of the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research, and the American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT/CIBMTR/ASBMT). Bone Marrow Transplant 37 (3): 249-61, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Chow EJ, Anderson L, Baker KS, et al.: Late Effects Surveillance Recommendations among Survivors of Childhood Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation: A Children's Oncology Group Report. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 22 (5): 782-95, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Bunin N, Small T, Szabolcs P, et al.: NCI, NHLBI/PBMTC first international conference on late effects after pediatric hematopoietic cell transplantation: persistent immune deficiency in pediatric transplant survivors. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 18 (1): 6-15, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Dvorak CC, Gracia CR, Sanders JE, et al.: NCI, NHLBI/PBMTC first international conference on late effects after pediatric hematopoietic cell transplantation: endocrine challenges-thyroid dysfunction, growth impairment, bone health, & reproductive risks. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 17 (12): 1725-38, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Parsons SK, Phipps S, Sung L, et al.: NCI, NHLBI/PBMTC First International Conference on Late Effects after Pediatric Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation: health-related quality of life, functional, and neurocognitive outcomes. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 18 (2): 162-71, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] The PDQ cancer information summaries are reviewed regularly and updated as new information becomes available. This section describes the latest changes made to this summary as of the date above. Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant (HSCT)–Related Acute Complications Added text to state that a second study was closed due to a lack of efficacy, bringing the validity of prophylactic defibrotide use into question (cited Grupp et al. as reference 27). Added text to state that although there are no randomized or prospective trials that used eculizumab for transplant-associated thrombotic microangiopathy (TA-TMA), there are published data from retrospective institutional and multicenter studies. Historically, the 1-year survival rate for untreated patients with TA-TMA was about 20%. A single-center study showed a 1-year overall survival (OS) rate of 66% with eculizumab treatment (cited Jodele et al. as reference 39). Also added text to state that  a multicenter study reported a 6-month OS rate of 47% with eculizumab treatment (cited Svec et al. as reference 40). This summary is written and maintained by the PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board, which is
editorially independent of NCI.  The summary reflects an independent review of
the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or NIH.  More
information about summary policies and the role of the PDQ Editorial Boards  in
maintaining the PDQ summaries can be found on the About This PDQ Summary and PDQ® Cancer Information for Health Professionals pages. This PDQ cancer information summary for health professionals provides comprehensive, peer-reviewed, evidence-based information about the complications, graft-versus-host disease, and late effects after  hematopoietic  stem cell transplant for the treatment of pediatric cancer. It is intended as a resource to inform and assist clinicians in the care of their patients.  It does not provide formal guidelines or recommendations for making health care decisions. This summary is reviewed regularly and updated as necessary by the PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board, which is editorially independent of the National Cancer Institute (NCI).  The summary reflects an independent review of the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Board members review recently published articles each month to determine whether an article should: be discussed at a meeting, be cited with text, or replace or update an existing article that is already cited. Changes to the summaries are made through a consensus process in which Board members evaluate the strength of the evidence in  the published articles and determine how the article should be included in the summary. The lead reviewers for Complications, Graft-Versus-Host Disease, and Late Effects After Pediatric Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant are: Thomas G. Gross, MD, PhD (National Cancer Institute) Michael A. Pulsipher, MD (Children's Hospital Los Angeles) Any comments or questions about the summary content should be submitted to Cancer.gov through the NCI website's Email Us. Do not contact the individual Board Members with questions or comments about the summaries. Board members will not respond to individual inquiries. Some of the reference citations in this summary are accompanied by a level-of-evidence designation. These designations are intended to help readers assess the strength of the evidence supporting the use of specific interventions or approaches. The PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board uses a formal evidence ranking system in developing its level-of-evidence designations. PDQ is a registered trademark. Although the content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text, it cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless it is presented in its entirety and is regularly updated. However, an author would be permitted to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks succinctly: [include excerpt from the summary].” The preferred citation for this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Complications, Graft-Versus-Host Disease, and Late Effects After Pediatric Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/childhood-cancers/hp-stem-cell-transplant/gvhd.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 35133768] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use within the PDQ summaries only. Permission to use images outside the context of PDQ information must be obtained from the owner(s) and cannot be granted by  the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the illustrations in this summary, along with many other cancer-related images, is available in Visuals Online, a collection of over 2,000 scientific images. Based on the strength of the available evidence, treatment options may be described as either “standard” or “under clinical evaluation.” These classifications should not be used as a basis for insurance reimbursement determinations. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s Email Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Hair Loss (Alopecia) and Cancer Treatment - Side Effects - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/hair-loss
txt: If treatment will cause hair loss, try wearing fun scarves and earrings—or a cap, from time to time. Some types of chemotherapy cause the hair on your head and other parts of your body to fall out. Radiation therapy can also cause hair loss on the part of the body that is being treated. Hair loss is called alopecia. Talk with your health care team to learn if the cancer treatment you will be receiving causes hair loss. Your doctor or nurse will share strategies that have helped others, including those listed below. Talk with your health care team about ways to manage before and after hair loss: Treat your hair gently. You may want to use a hairbrush with soft bristles or a wide-tooth comb. Do not use hair dryers, irons, or products such as gels or clips that may hurt your scalp. Wash your hair with a mild shampoo. Wash it less often and be very gentle. Pat it dry with a soft towel.  You have choices. Some people choose to cut their hair short to make it easier to deal with when it starts to fall out. Others choose to shave their head. If you choose to shave your head, use an electric shaver so you won’t cut yourself. If you plan to buy a wig, get one while you still have hair so you can match it to the color of your hair. If you find wigs to be itchy and hot, try wearing a comfortable scarf or turban.  Protect and care for your scalp. Use sunscreen or wear a hat when you are outside. Choose a comfortable scarf or hat that you enjoy and that keeps your head warm. If your scalp itches or feels tender, using lotions and conditioners can help it feel better.  Talk about your feelings. Many people feel angry, depressed, or embarrassed about hair loss. It can help to share these feelings with someone who understands. Some people find it helpful to talk with other people who have lost their hair during cancer treatment. Talking openly and honestly with your children and close family members can also help you all. Tell them that you expect to lose your hair during treatment.  Be gentle. When your hair starts to grow back, you will want to be gentle with it. Avoid too much brushing, curling, and blow-drying. You may not want to wash your hair as frequently.  After chemotherapy. Hair often grows back in 2 to 3 months after treatment has ended. Your hair will be very fine when it starts to grow back. Sometimes your new hair can be curlier or straighter—or even a different color. In time, it may go back to how it was before treatment.  After radiation therapy. Hair often grows back in 3 to 6 months after treatment has ended. If you received a very high dose of radiation your hair may grow back thinner or not at all on the part of your body that received radiation.  Prepare for your visit by making a list of questions to ask. Consider adding these questions to your list: Is treatment likely to cause my hair to fall out?  How should I protect and care for my head? Are there products that you recommend? Ones I should avoid?  Where can I get a wig or hairpiece?  What support groups could I meet with that might help?  When will my hair grow back?   Listen to tips on how to manage hair loss caused by cancer treatments such as radiation therapy.
(Type: MP3 | Time: 3:39 | Size: 3.4MB)View Transcript Narrator:
What to do about hair loss during radiation therapy. Let's listen in on a support group as the group's leader, Janet, opens the discussion by talking with members about coping with hair loss, also called alopecia. Janet:
Okay—let's get started. First, I want to make sure you all know that people tend to lose hair only in the area where they get radiation therapy. Tonight, we're going to talk about different ways to prepare for hair loss and what can make this a little easier. Who would like to start? Kim:
I will. [sigh] I hate that my hair is already thinning. I'm getting radiation therapy to my head, and I wake up to a new handful of hair on my pillow each morning. I'm not a vain person, but I love my hair. Janet:
Kim, hair loss can be very hard. I'm so sorry. Most people find that their hair starts to fall out in the area where they are getting radiation therapy, about 2 to 3 weeks after their first radiation therapy session. Kim:
That makes sense—I started my first treatment 3 weeks ago. Rodney:
It helped me that I started out half bald to begin with. But I know what you are saying, Kim. I would wake up to hair on my pillow each morning. I decided to shave my hair off before it fell out on its own from treatment. I used a good electric razor—learned the hard way when the plastic one cut my scalp. Kim:
Rodney—the bald look is great for you. I'm just not ready to shave it all off right now. Janet:
Rodney, thanks for letting us know what worked well for you. Who else would like to share? Cara:
Well—first I cut my hair short so the shock factor was less. And I got a wig before all my hair fell out. The first one I got matched my natural hair color. That one was free. Then I thought, hey, I've always wanted to be a redhead—so I bought a red wig. Kim:
The first one was free? Cara:
Yes. The nurse gave me the number of a place that supplies wigs at no charge. But wigs can be hot, especially in the summer. That's why you see me in this colorful scarf wrapped around my head like a turban. Personally, I think a turban is the way to go! Miguel:
I see a lot of women at the hospital wearing bandannas. Some men too. Cara:
I've seen lots of people at the clinic in baseball caps! Kim:
These are great suggestions. Thanks, guys. But I still need to know one thing—Janet, will my hair grow back? Janet:
Your hair may grow back in 3 to 6 months after your treatment is over. It really depends on the amount of radiation you get. People who get very high doses may not see their hair return. In the meantime, wash your hair gently with a mild shampoo and pat it dry. I'd also avoid using a hair dryer. Kim:
Okay, Janet, thanks. And thanks, everyone, for sharing your ideas. Looks like I'm going scarf shopping! Cara:
Want some company? Kim:
Sure, that would be great. Do you think we could go tomorrow afternoon? Narrator Summary:
Hair loss can be difficult for both men and women. It's important to remember that people tend to lose their hair only in the area where they get radiation. Most often, hair grows back 3 to 6 months after you complete treatment. If you'd like to wear a wig, talk with a nurse or a social worker where you receive treatment. In some cases, your wig may be free or covered by your health insurance. And as some group members shared, you can always wear a scarf, bandanna, cap, or nothing at all on your head. Choose whatever works and feels best for you.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Spine Anatomy and Functions - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/rare-brain-spine-tumor/tumors/anatomy/spine-functions-infographic
txt: 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: What We Do - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/crchd/about/what-we-do
txt: To advance cancer health equity and overcome disparities, the Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities (CRCHD): Initiates, integrates, and promotes collaborative research studies across NCI divisions and NIH institutes and centers to address cancer health disparities  Coordinates and strengthens the NCI cancer research portfolio in basic, clinical, translational, and population-based research to address cancer health disparities  Promotes research that incorporates new and emerging technologies  Engages health disparity populations in the research process to ensure that research, outreach, and education efforts are culturally tailored to meet their needs  Leads NCI's efforts to train the next generation of competitive cancer and cancer health disparities researchers from populations underrepresented in the biomedical sciences, to build a research workforce that reflects an increasingly diverse America, by providing funded research training opportunities across the academic continuum to those who otherwise are at risk of being lost from the training pipeline  Creates state-of-the-art regional networks or "hubs," dedicated to cancer health disparities research, diversity training, and community education/outreach through geographic program management 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: RAS Initiative Research Teams - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/key-initiatives/ras/research-teams
txt: The RAS Initiative is composed of nine highly collaborative teams that are based out of the Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR). Each team supports and augments the work of the others and connects to external RAS researchers across the world. Our teams use cutting edge technologies to study RAS, and they develop and adapt assays and screens to find new drug candidates that can be confidently assessed. Learn about each team’s progress, projects, and tools, and meet the team members and collaborators who are contributing to this breaking research.  Biochemistry & Biophysics Research


Our team evaluates new approaches to target KRAS and collaborates with other teams to screen new molecules for their inhibitory activity towards KRAS. Our assays characterize the interaction between RAS proteins and their regulators and effectors in solution or on the membrane.  Bioinformatics Research


Our team provides data processing and analytical support by processing, mining, and analyzing. Our tools organize and interpret data generated across the RAS Initiative, and they analyze imports of “big data” from public repositories, all with a focus on genes in the RAS pathway.  Chemistry Research


Our team drives medicinal chemistry efforts for drug discovery projects throughout the RAS Initiative. We are involved in the design, synthesis, and characterization of small molecules for use as potential therapeutic agents in the treatment of RAS-driven cancers.  Computational Chemistry Research


Our team informs drug discovery by using computers to perform large-scale screens of hundreds of millions—soon to be billions—of molecules. We are highly collaborative and support wet lab teams within the RAS Initiative.  Drug Screening and Preclinical Research


Our team seeks to discover and develop compounds that directly target oncogenic RAS proteins. We use disulfide tethering technology as a fragment-based screening method to find novel cryptic and potentially druggable pockets in RAS or small GTPases.  Imaging Research


Our team develops and applies new optical microscopy techniques to understand how RAS molecules move, interact, and signal in living cells. From our imaging, we develop assays to screen for disruption and mislocalization of RAS proteins and complexes.  Mass Spectrometry Research


Our team employs cutting-edge protein analysis methods to better understand and target canonical RAS isoforms, RAS-related proteins, and RAS-dependent signaling pathways.  Reagents Research


Our team develops and evaluates new technologies for producing novel DNA, cell line, and protein reagents. We share our developments with teams throughout the RAS Initiative and make them available to external scientists who study RAS and the RAS pathway.  Structural Biology Research


Our team uses a combination of biochemical, structural, and cell biological techniques to study RAS signaling and enable drug development via structure-based drug design to target RAS directly or indirectly.  Our team evaluates new approaches to target KRAS and collaborates with other teams to screen new molecules for their inhibitory activity towards KRAS. Our assays characterize the interaction between RAS proteins and their regulators and effectors in solution or on the membrane. Our team provides data processing and analytical support by processing, mining, and analyzing. Our tools organize and interpret data generated across the RAS Initiative, and they analyze imports of “big data” from public repositories, all with a focus on genes in the RAS pathway. Our team drives medicinal chemistry efforts for drug discovery projects throughout the RAS Initiative. We are involved in the design, synthesis, and characterization of small molecules for use as potential therapeutic agents in the treatment of RAS-driven cancers. Our team informs drug discovery by using computers to perform large-scale screens of hundreds of millions—soon to be billions—of molecules. We are highly collaborative and support wet lab teams within the RAS Initiative. Our team seeks to discover and develop compounds that directly target oncogenic RAS proteins. We use disulfide tethering technology as a fragment-based screening method to find novel cryptic and potentially druggable pockets in RAS or small GTPases. Our team develops and applies new optical microscopy techniques to understand how RAS molecules move, interact, and signal in living cells. From our imaging, we develop assays to screen for disruption and mislocalization of RAS proteins and complexes. Our team employs cutting-edge protein analysis methods to better understand and target canonical RAS isoforms, RAS-related proteins, and RAS-dependent signaling pathways. Our team develops and evaluates new technologies for producing novel DNA, cell line, and protein reagents. We share our developments with teams throughout the RAS Initiative and make them available to external scientists who study RAS and the RAS pathway. Our team uses a combination of biochemical, structural, and cell biological techniques to study RAS signaling and enable drug development via structure-based drug design to target RAS directly or indirectly.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Childhood Adrenocortical Carcinoma Treatment - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/adrenocortical/patient/child-adrenocortical-treatment-pdq
txt:  General Information About Childhood Adrenocortical Carcinoma  Stages of Adrenocortical Carcinoma  Treatment Option Overview  Treatment of Childhood Adrenocortical Carcinoma  Treatment of Recurrent Childhood Adrenocortical Carcinoma  To Learn More About Childhood Adrenocortical Carcinoma  About This PDQ Summary  Adrenocortical carcinoma is a rare disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in
		  the outer layer of the adrenal gland. Having a certain mutation (change) in the TP53 gene increases the risk of adrenocortical carcinoma. Signs and symptoms of adrenocortical carcinoma include a lump or pain in the abdomen. Tests that examine the adrenal glands are used to diagnose and stage adrenocortical carcinoma. Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery). There are two  adrenal glands. The adrenal glands are small and shaped like a triangle. One adrenal gland sits on top of each kidney. Each adrenal gland has two parts. The outer layer of the adrenal gland is the adrenal cortex. The center of the adrenal gland is the adrenal medulla. Adrenocortical carcinoma is also called adrenocortical cancer or cancer of the adrenal cortex.EnlargeAnatomy of the adrenal gland. There are two adrenal glands, one on top of each kidney. The outer part of each gland is the adrenal cortex and the inner part is the adrenal medulla. The adrenal cortex makes important hormones that: Balance the water and salt in the body. Help keep blood pressure normal. Help control the body's use of protein, fat, and carbohydrates. Cause the body to have male or female characteristics. The adrenal medulla makes hormones that help the body react to stress. Cancer that forms in the adrenal medulla is called pheochromocytoma and is not discussed in this summary. See the PDQ summary on  Childhood Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma Treatment for more information. Most childhood adrenocortical tumors occur during the first 5 years of life, but they may also occur during adolescence. Anything that increases your chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your child's doctor if you think your child may be at risk. The risk of adrenocortical carcinoma is increased by having a mutation (change) in the TP53 gene or any of the following syndromes: Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. Hemihyperplasia. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by adrenocortical carcinoma or by other conditions. Check with your child's doctor if your child has any of the following: Pain in the abdomen or back. A lump in the abdomen. Feeling of fullness in the abdomen. High blood pressure. Acne. Growing body hair. Deepening of the voice. Growing faster than normal. Also, cancer of the adrenal cortex may be functioning (makes more hormones than normal) or nonfunctioning (does not make extra hormones). Most tumors of the adrenal cortex in children are functioning tumors. The extra hormones made by functioning tumors may cause certain signs or symptoms of disease and these depend on the type of hormone made by the tumor.
For example, extra           androgen hormone may also cause male  children to develop an enlarged penis and female children to develop enlarged genitalia. Extra estrogen hormone may cause the growth of breast tissue in male children. Extra cortisol hormone may cause  (hypercortisolism). See the PDQ summary onAdrenocortical Carcinoma Treatment (Adult)   for more information on the signs and symptoms of adrenocortical carcinoma. Tests are done to diagnose and stage cancer. After cancer is diagnosed, more tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread to nearby areas or to other parts of the body. This process is called staging. It is important to know whether cancer has spread in order to plan the best treatment. The following tests and procedures may be used: Physical exam and health history: An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patient’s health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. X-ray: An x-ray of the chest, abdomen, or bones inside the body.  An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. CT scan: A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the chest or abdomen, taken from different angles.  The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.  This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography.EnlargeComputed tomography (CT) scan. The child lies on a table that slides through the CT scanner, which takes a series of detailed x-ray pictures of areas inside the body. MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas of the body, such as the chest and abdomen. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI).EnlargeMagnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan. The child lies on a table that slides into the MRI machine, which takes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. The positioning of the child on the table depends on the part of the body being imaged. PET scan: A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body.  A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein.  The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body.  Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do.EnlargePositron emission tomography (PET) scan. The child lies on a table that slides through the PET scanner. The head rest and white strap help the child lie still.  A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into the child's vein, and a scanner makes a picture of where the glucose is being used in the body.  Cancer cells show up brighter in the picture because they take up more glucose than normal cells do. Ultrasound exam: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs, such as the abdomen, and make echoes.  The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. The picture can be printed to be looked at later.EnlargeAbdominal ultrasound. An ultrasound transducer connected to a computer is pressed against the skin of the abdomen. The transducer bounces sound waves off internal organs and tissues to make echoes that form a sonogram (computer picture). Biopsy: The removal of cells or tissues during surgery so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. Blood chemistry studies: A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. Blood hormone studies: A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain hormones released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease in the organ or tissue that makes it. The blood may be checked for testosterone or estrogen. A higher than normal amount of these hormones may be a sign of adrenocortical carcinoma. Twenty-four-hour urine test: A test in which urine is collected for 24 hours to measure the amounts of cortisol or 17-ketosteroids. A higher than normal amount of these substances in the urine may be a sign of disease in the adrenal cortex. Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test: A test in which one or more small doses of dexamethasone  are given. The level of cortisol is checked from a sample of blood or from urine that is collected for three days. This test is done to check if the adrenal gland is making too much cortisol. High-dose dexamethasone suppression test: A test in which one or more high doses of dexamethasone  are given. The level of cortisol is checked from a sample of blood or from urine that is collected for three days. This test is done to check if the adrenal gland is making too much cortisol or if the pituitary gland is telling the adrenal glands to make too much cortisol. Adrenal angiography: A procedure to look at the arteries and the flow of blood near the adrenal gland. A contrast dye is injected into the adrenal arteries. As the dye moves through the blood vessel, a series of x-rays are taken to see if any arteries are blocked. Adrenal venography: A procedure to look at the adrenal veins and the flow of blood near the adrenal glands. A contrast dye is injected into an adrenal vein. As the contrast dye moves through the vein, a series of x-rays are taken to see if any veins are blocked. A catheter (very thin tube) may be inserted into the vein to take a blood sample, which is checked for abnormal hormone levels. The prognosis is good for patients who have small tumors that have been completely removed by surgery. For other patients, the prognosis depends on the following: The size of the tumor. How quickly the cancer is growing. Whether there are changes in certain genes. Whether the tumor has spread to other parts of the body, including the lymph nodes, liver, lung, kidney, or bone. The child's age. Whether the covering around the tumor broke open during surgery to remove the tumor. Whether the tumor was completely removed during surgery. Whether the child has developed masculine traits. After adrenocortical carcinoma has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread to nearby areas or to other parts of the body. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer has spread to tissues near the adrenal glands or to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process is used  to plan treatment. The results of the tests and procedures used to diagnose cancer are often also used to stage the disease. Sometimes childhood adrenocortical carcinoma recurs (comes back) in the adrenal cortex or in other parts of the body after it has been treated. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if  adrenocortical carcinoma spreads to the liver, the cancer cells in the liver are actually adrenocortical carcinoma cells. The disease is metastatic adrenocortical carcinoma, not liver cancer. There are different types of treatment for children with adrenocortical carcinoma. Children with adrenocortical carcinoma should have their treatment planned by a team of doctors who are experts in treating childhood cancer. Two types of standard treatment are used:SurgeryChemotherapy New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials.Immunotherapy Treatment for childhood adrenocortical carcinoma may cause side effects. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Follow-up tests may be needed. Surgery Chemotherapy Immunotherapy Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials.  A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the  standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Because cancer in children is rare, taking part in a clinical trial should be considered.  Some clinical trials are open only to patients  who have not started treatment. Treatment will be overseen by a pediatric oncologist, a doctor who specializes in treating children with cancer. The pediatric oncologist works with other pediatric health professionals who are experts in treating children with cancer and who specialize in certain areas of medicine. This may include the following specialists and others: Pediatrician. Pediatric surgeon. Radiation oncologist. Pathologist. Endocrinologist. Pediatric nurse specialist. Social worker. Rehabilitation specialist. Psychologist. Child-life specialist. Surgery to remove the tumor is the main treatment for adrenocortical carcinoma. Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Immunotherapy is a treatment that uses the patient’s immune system to fight cancer.  Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the body’s natural defenses against cancer.  This cancer treatment is a type of biologic therapy. Immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy is a type of immunotherapy that blocks certain proteins. PD-1 is a protein on the surface of T cells that helps keep the body’s immune responses in check. PD-L1 is a protein found on some types of cancer cells. When PD-1 attaches to PD-L1, it stops the T cell from killing the cancer cell. PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibitors keep PD-1 and PD-L1 proteins from attaching to each other. This allows the T cells to kill cancer cells. Pembrolizumab is a  PD-1 inhibitor that is being studied in the treatment of childhood adrenocortical  carcinoma that is advanced or has come back after treatment. To learn more about side effects that begin during treatment for cancer, visit Side Effects. Side effects from cancer treatment that begin after treatment and continue for months or years are called late effects. Late effects of cancer treatment may include the following: Physical problems, including problems with the thyroid gland, hearing, fully opening the mouth, dental cavities, and chronic sinusitis or ear infections. Changes in mood, feelings, thinking, learning, or memory. Second cancers (new types of cancer) or other conditions. Some late effects may be treated or controlled. It is important to talk with your child's doctors about the possible late effects caused by some treatments.  See the PDQ summary on Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. for more information. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer  treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first  to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. As your child goes through treatment, they will have follow-up tests or checkups. Some tests that were done to diagnose or stage the cancer may be repeated to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your child's condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of newly diagnosed adrenocortical carcinoma in children may include the following: Surgery to remove the adrenal gland and, if needed, cancer that has spread to other parts of the body. Sometimes chemotherapy is also given. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview  section. Treatment of recurrent adrenocortical carcinoma in children may include the following: A clinical trial of an immune checkpoint inhibitor. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For more information from the National Cancer Institute about adrenocortical carcinoma, see the following: Adrenocortical Carcinoma Home Page MyPART (My Pediatric and  Rare Tumor Network) Computed Tomography (CT) Scans and Cancer Immunotherapy to Treat Cancer For more childhood cancer information and other general cancer resources, visit: About Cancer Childhood Cancers CureSearch for Children's Cancer Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer Adolescents and Young Adults with Cancer Children with Cancer: A Guide for Parents Cancer in Children and Adolescents Staging Coping with Cancer Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer For Survivors and Caregivers Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish. PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the treatment of childhood adrenocortical carcinoma.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board. A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Childhood Adrenocortical Carcinoma Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/adrenocortical/patient/child-adrenocortical-treatment-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online. Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Hepatocellular Carcinoma Study - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/ccg/research/genome-sequencing/tcga/studied-cancers/hepatocellular-carcinoma-study
txt: What is hepatocellular carcinoma? Hepatocellular carcinoma is the most common form of liver cancer in the United States, making up more than 80% of cases.1 This disease arises in the hepatocytes, the cells that make up most of the liver.1 Worldwide, this cancer is the third leading cause of cancer-related deaths, but in the United States, it ranks at ninth.2 On a global scale, 78% of liver cancer cases are secondary to chronic Hepatitis B or C infections.2 Another risk factor is cirrhosis, a chronic disease where scar tissue replaces liver cells.1 An estimated 28,720 new cases were diagnosed in the Unites States in 2012.1 View additional information on liver cancer. What have TCGA researchers learned about hepatocellular cancer? An analysis of 196 hepatocellular carcinoma cases confirmed frequent mutations in:
	The TERT promotor region, associated with regulating cell survival
TP53, one of the most frequently mutated genes in cancer
CTNNB1, a member of the Wnt signaling pathway that mediates cell growth and differentiation  Genetic alterations in hepatocellular carcinoma may be targeted by therapies that are currently available or under development:
	Mutations of the TERT promotor, found in 44% of the cancers studied, may be targeted with telomerase inhibitors that are under development.
In many tumors, TP53 was not genetically altered but inhibited by expression of MDM4, which in turn may be inhibited by investigational drugs.
20% of tumors studied showed elevated expression of immune evasion genes, suggesting that this subset may be sensitive to immunotherapies that strengthen the immune system’s surveillance.  The TERT promotor region, associated with regulating cell survival  TP53, one of the most frequently mutated genes in cancer  CTNNB1, a member of the Wnt signaling pathway that mediates cell growth and differentiation  Mutations of the TERT promotor, found in 44% of the cancers studied, may be targeted with telomerase inhibitors that are under development.  In many tumors, TP53 was not genetically altered but inhibited by expression of MDM4, which in turn may be inhibited by investigational drugs.  20% of tumors studied showed elevated expression of immune evasion genes, suggesting that this subset may be sensitive to immunotherapies that strengthen the immune system’s surveillance. 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Sleep Disorders - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/sleep-disorders-pdq
txt:  General Information About Sleep Disorders  Sleep Disorders in People with Cancer  Assessment of Sleep Disorders  Treatment of Sleep Disorders  Sleep Disorders in Special Cases  Current Clinical Trials  To Learn More About Sleep Disorders  About This PDQ Summary  Getting enough sleep is needed for both physical and mental health. Sleep has two main phases that repeat during the sleeping period. Sleep disorders affect normal sleep patterns. Sleep is an important part of physical and mental health. While we sleep, the brain  and body do a number of important  jobs that  help us stay in good health and function at our best. Getting the sleep we need: Improves our ability to learn, remember, and solve problems. Lowers blood pressure and gives the heart and blood vessels the rest they need. Helps certain hormones control the following: Growth.The repair of cells and tissues. The immune system (to fight infection).Blood sugar levels (which affect energy).Appetite. Growth. The repair of cells and tissues. The immune system (to fight infection). Blood sugar levels (which affect energy). Appetite. There are two main phases of sleep, and both are needed in order to get "a good night's sleep." The two main phases of sleep are rapid eye movement (REM) and non-rapid eye movement (NREM): REM sleep, also known as "dream sleep," is the phase of sleep in which the brain is active. NREM is the quiet or restful phase of sleep. It has four stages, from light sleep to deep sleep. The phases of sleep repeat during the night in a  cycle of a non-REM phase followed by a REM phase. Each cycle lasts about 90 minutes and is repeated 4 to 6 times during  7 to 8 hours of  sleep. Normal sleep patterns differ from person to person. The amount of sleep you need to feel rested may be less or more than others need. If sleep is interrupted or does not last long enough, the phases of sleep are not completed and the brain cannot finish all the tasks that help  restore the body and mind. There are five major types of sleep disorders that affect  normal sleep. Insomnia: Being unable to fall asleep and stay asleep. Sleep apnea: A breathing disorder in which breathing stops for 10 seconds or more during sleep. Hypersomnia:  Being unable to stay awake during the day. Circadian rhythm disorders: Problems with the sleep-wake cycle, making you unable to sleep and wake at the right times. Parasomnia: Acting in unusual ways while falling asleep, sleeping, or waking from sleep, such as walking, talking, or eating. Sleep disorders keep you from having a good night's sleep. This may make it hard for you to stay  alert and involved in activities during the day.  Sleep disorders can cause problems for people with cancer. You may not be able  to remember  treatment instructions and may have trouble making  decisions. Being well-rested can improve energy and help you cope with side effects of cancer and treatment. Sleep problems that go on for a long time may increase the risk of anxiety or depression. Sleep disorders are common in people with cancer. Tumors may cause sleep problems. Certain drugs or treatments may affect sleep. Being in the hospital may make it harder to sleep. Stress caused by learning the cancer diagnosis often causes sleeping problems. Other health problems not related to cancer may cause a  sleep disorder. As many as half of people with cancer have problems sleeping. The sleep disorders most likely to affect people with cancer are insomnia and an abnormal sleep-wake cycle. There are many reasons you may have trouble sleeping, including: Physical changes caused by the cancer or surgery. Side effects of drugs or other treatments. Being in the hospital. Stress about having cancer. Health problems not related to the cancer. If you have a tumor, it may cause the following problems that make it hard to sleep: Pressure from the tumor on nearby areas of the body. Gastrointestinal problems (nausea, constipation, diarrhea, being unable to control your bowels). Bladder problems (irritation, being unable to control urine flow). Pain. Fever. Cough. Trouble breathing. Itching. Feeling very tired. Common cancer treatments and drugs can affect normal sleep patterns. How well you sleep may be affected by: Hormone therapy. Corticosteroids. Sedatives and tranquilizers. Antidepressants. Anticonvulsants. Long-term use of certain drugs may cause insomnia.  Stopping or decreasing the use of certain drugs can also affect normal sleep. Other side effects of drugs and treatments that may affect the sleep-wake cycle include the following: Pain. For more information, see Pain. Anxiety. For more information, see Adjustment to Cancer: Anxiety and Distress. Night sweats or hot flashes.  For more information, see Hot Flashes and Night Sweats. Gastrointestinal problems such as nausea, constipation, diarrhea, and being unable to control the bowels. For more information, see Gastrointestinal Complications. Bladder problems, such as irritation or being unable to control urine. Breathing problems. Getting a normal night’s sleep in the hospital is difficult. The following may affect your  sleep in a hospital: Hospital environment – You may be bothered by an uncomfortable bed,  pillow, or room temperature; noise; or sharing a room with a stranger. Hospital routine – Sleep may be interrupted when doctors and nurses come in to check on you or give you drugs, other treatments, or exams. Getting sleep during a hospital stay may also be affected by anxiety and age. Stress, anxiety,  and depression are common
reactions to learning you have cancer, receiving  treatments, and
being in the hospital. These are common causes of insomnia. For more information, see Depression. People with cancer can have sleep disorders that are caused by other health problems. Conditions such as snoring, headaches and daytime seizures increase the chance of having a sleep disorder. An assessment is done for people with sleep disorders. A sleep disorder assessment includes a physical exam, health history, and sleep history. A polysomnogram may be used to help diagnose the sleep disorder. An assessment is done to  find problems that may be causing  the sleep disorder and how it affects your life. People with mild sleep disorders may be irritable and unable to concentrate. People with moderate sleep disorders can be depressed and anxious. These sleep disorders may make it hard for you to stay alert and involved in activities during the day. You may not be able to remember treatment instructions and may have trouble making decisions. Being well-rested can improve energy and help you cope with side effects of cancer and treatment. People with cancer should have assessments done from time to time because sleep disorders may become more or less severe over time. Your doctor will do a physical exam and take a medical history that includes: Side effects of your cancer and cancer treatments. Medicines, including vitamins, and other over-the-counter drugs. Emotional effects of the cancer and treatments. Diet. Exercise. Caregiver routines. You and your family can tell your doctor about your sleep history and patterns of sleep. A polysomnogram is a group of recordings taken during sleep that show: Brain wave changes. Eye movements. Breathing rate. Blood pressure. Heart rate and electrical activity of the heart and other muscles. This information helps the doctor find the cause of your sleeping problems. Treating sleep disorders may include supportive care for side effects of cancer or cancer treatment. Cognitive behavioral therapy may reduce anxiety and help you relax. Learning good sleep habits is important. If treatment without drugs does not help,
sleep medicines may be used for a short time. Sleep disorders often occur along with cancer-related fatigue and may be related. Sleep disorders that are caused by side effects of the cancer or cancer treatment may be helped by relieving the symptoms of those side effects. It's important to talk about your sleep problems with your family and the health care team so education and support can be given. Supportive care may improve your quality of life and ability to sleep. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) helps reduce anxiety about getting enough sleep. You learn to change negative thoughts and beliefs about sleep into positive thoughts and images, in order to fall asleep more easily. CBT helps replace the anxiety of  “I need to sleep” with the idea of “just relax.” You learn how to change sleep habits that keep you from sleeping well. If in-person CBT sessions with a health professional are not available, video CBT sessions have been shown to be helpful. CBT may include the following: Stimulus control. Sleep restriction. Relaxation therapy. Stimulus controlWhen you have sleep problems for a long time, just getting ready for bed or getting into bed to sleep may cause you to start worrying that you will have another sleepless night.  That worry then makes it very hard to fall asleep.  Stimulus control can help you learn to connect getting ready for bed and being in bed only with  being asleep. By using the  bed and bedroom only when you're sleepy, the bed and  sleep are linked in your mind. Stimulus control   may include the following changes in your sleeping habits:Go to bed only when sleepy and get out of bed if you do not fall asleep after a short time. Return to bed only when you feel sleepy.Use the bed and bedroom only for sleeping, not for other activities. Sleep restrictionSleep restriction decreases the time you spend in bed sleeping.  This  makes you more likely to feel sleepy the next night. The time you can set aside for sleeping is increased when your sleep improves. Relaxation therapyRelaxation therapy is used to relieve muscle tension and stress, lower blood pressure, and control pain. It may involve tensing and relaxing muscles throughout the body. It is often  used with guided imagery (focusing the mind on positive images) and meditation (focusing thoughts). Self-hypnosis at bedtime can also help you feel relaxed and sleepy. Relaxation therapy exercises can make it easier for stimulus control and sleep restriction to work for you. When you have sleep problems for a long time, just getting ready for bed or getting into bed to sleep may cause you to start worrying that you will have another sleepless night.  That worry then makes it very hard to fall asleep.  Stimulus control can help you learn to connect getting ready for bed and being in bed only with  being asleep. By using the  bed and bedroom only when you're sleepy, the bed and  sleep are linked in your mind. Stimulus control   may include the following changes in your sleeping habits: Go to bed only when sleepy and get out of bed if you do not fall asleep after a short time. Return to bed only when you feel sleepy. Use the bed and bedroom only for sleeping, not for other activities. Sleep restriction decreases the time you spend in bed sleeping.  This  makes you more likely to feel sleepy the next night. The time you can set aside for sleeping is increased when your sleep improves. Relaxation therapy is used to relieve muscle tension and stress, lower blood pressure, and control pain. It may involve tensing and relaxing muscles throughout the body. It is often  used with guided imagery (focusing the mind on positive images) and meditation (focusing thoughts). Self-hypnosis at bedtime can also help you feel relaxed and sleepy. Relaxation therapy exercises can make it easier for stimulus control and sleep restriction to work for you. Good sleep habits help you fall asleep more easily and stay asleep. Habits and routines that may help improve sleep include the following: A comfortable bed and bedroom Making your bed and bedroom more comfortable may help you sleep. Some ways to increase bedroom comfort include: Keep the room quiet. Dim or turn off lights. Keep the room at a comfortable temperature. Keep skin clean and dry. Dress in loose, soft clothing. Keep bedding and pillows clean, dry, and smooth, without wrinkles. Use blankets to keep warm. Use pillows to get into a comfortable position. Regular bowel and bladder habits Regular bowel and bladder habits reduce the number of times you have to get up during the night. Waking during the night to go to the bathroom may be reduced by doing the following: Drink more fluids during the day. Eat more high-fiber foods during the day. Avoid drinking a lot before bedtime. Empty your bowel and bladder before going to bed. Diet and exercise The following diet and exercise habits may improve sleep: Stay active during the day. Get regular exercise but don't exercise  within 3 hours of bedtime. Eat a high-protein snack (such as milk or turkey) 2 hours before bedtime. Avoid heavy, spicy, or sugary foods before bedtime. Avoid drinking alcohol or smoking before bedtime. Avoid foods and drinks that have caffeine, including dietary supplements to control appetite. Other habits that may improve sleep include: Avoid naps. Avoid watching TV or working in the bedroom. Relax before bedtime. Go to sleep and wake up at the same hours every day, no matter how little you slept. Hospital routines Getting a good night's sleep in a hospital or other care facility can be hard to do. The good sleep habits listed above may help you.  As a hospital patient, you may also: Ask caregivers to plan care so they wake you up the least number of times during the night. Ask for a back rub or massage to relieve pain or help you relax. Treatment without drugs does not always work. Sometimes cognitive behavioral therapies are not available or they do not help. Also, some sleep disorders are caused by conditions that need to be treated with drugs, such as hot flashes, pain, anxiety, depression, or mood disorders.  The drug used will depend on your type of sleep problem (such as trouble falling asleep or  trouble staying asleep) and other medicines you're taking. All of your other medicines and health conditions will affect which sleeping medicines are safe and will work well for you. Some  drugs that help you sleep should not be stopped suddenly. Suddenly stopping them may cause nervousness, seizures, and a change in the REM phase of sleep that increases dreaming, including nightmares. This change in REM sleep may be dangerous for people with peptic ulcers or heart conditions. People Who Have Pain Older Patients People Who Have Jaw  Surgery If pain disturbs your sleep, treatment to relieve the pain will be used before sleep medicines are used. Pain drugs, other drugs being taken, and any other health conditions may affect which sleeping medicines are prescribed. It's normal for older people to have some insomnia. Changes related to age can cause lighter sleep, waking up more often  during the night,  and sleeping less total time. If you are an older person with cancer who is having trouble sleeping, the doctor will look for the specific causes,  such as: Physical health problems. Mental health problems, such as anxiety or depression. Loss of social support. Alcohol use (drinking). Side effects of medicines. Conditions that commonly affect sleep, such as restless legs syndrome, cramping or jerking of the legs during sleep, and sleep apnea syndrome. Treating sleeping problems without drugs is tried first.  The following may help improve sleep in older people with cancer: Having meals at regular times. Avoiding naps during the day. Being more active during the day. Medicine may be used if non-drug treatments don't work. The doctor will look at all your medicines  and health conditions before choosing a sleeping medicine.  

For some people, doctors will suggest a sleep disorder clinic for treatment. People who have surgery on the jaw may develop sleep apnea, which is a sleep disorder that causes the person to stop breathing for 10 seconds or more during sleep. Plastic surgery to rebuild the jaw may help prevent sleep apnea. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For more information from the National Cancer Institute 
        about sleep problems, see the following: Sleep Problems and Cancer Treatment Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish. PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the causes and treatment of sleep disorders.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Supportive and Palliative Care Editorial Board. A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Supportive and Palliative Care Editorial Board. PDQ Sleep Disorders. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/sleep-disorders-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389249] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online. Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Adult Immunotherapy Network - Cancer Moonshot Recommendation - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/key-initiatives/moonshot-cancer-initiative/implementation/adult-immunotherapy-network
txt:  The Immuno-Oncology Translational Network (IOTN)  Highlights of IOTN Research Progress  NCI Center for Cell-Based Therapy (CCT)  Cancer Immune Monitoring and Analysis Centers (CIMACs) and the Cancer Immunologic Data Commons (CIDC)  Pancreatic Cancer Microenvironment Network (PaCMEN)  PRE-medical Cancer Immunotherapy Network Canine Trials (PRECINCT)  Adult Immunotherapy Projects Awarded Cancer Moonshot Funding  The Immuno-Oncology Translational Network (IOTN) Highlights of IOTN Research Progress NCI Center for Cell-Based Therapy (CCT) Cancer Immune Monitoring and Analysis Centers (CIMACs) and the Cancer Immunologic Data Commons (CIDC) Pancreatic Cancer Microenvironment Network (PaCMEN) PRE-medical Cancer Immunotherapy Network Canine Trials (PRECINCT) Adult Immunotherapy Projects Awarded Cancer Moonshot Funding NCI has announced several funding opportunities that align with the Cancer Moonshot. Immunotherapy leverages the ability of the immune system to recognize and destroy infected, damaged, and abnormal cells. This type of cancer treatment trains and augments immune cells to recognize and kill cancer cells by distinguishing them from normal cells. However, several challenges need to be addressed to improve the effectiveness of immunotherapy. While there has been some promising success in treating certain cancers with immunotherapy, it has been less effective for other cancers. Safely and effectively targeting cancer cells without harming normal tissues is often more difficult in solid tumors than blood and bone cancers. The tumor’s microenvironment may also suppress the immune system, limiting its ability to fight off the cancer. This Cancer Moonshot recommendation is focused on developing new immunotherapies, improving the effectiveness of current immunotherapy treatments, and creating vaccines that will prevent new cancer cases to reduce the burden of cancer in adults. The Immuno-Oncology Translational Network (IOTN) The IOTN is accelerating immuno-oncology through collaboration. The collaborative Immuno-Oncology Translational Network is working to accelerate the discovery of new immune targets for cancer treatments and the development of new immunotherapies to treat and prevent adult cancers. Researchers working on IOTN Immunotherapy Research Projects are investigating interactions between tumors and the immune system, identifying new targets for immunotherapies, examining the development of resistance to immunotherapies, and testing new immunotherapies in preclinical studies. IOTN Immunoprevention Research Projects are identifying targets for immunoprevention approaches in pre-cancers and designing early interventions, like cancer vaccines, to prevent high-risk adult cancers in adults. Researchers working on IOTN Research Projects for Mitigating Immune-Related Adverse Events are investigating ways to eliminate or reduce harmful side effects caused by immunotherapies. Investigators with the IOTN Immuno-Engineering to Improve Immunotherapy (i3) Centers are using bioengineering and systems biology approaches to design more effective, safer, and broadly available immunotherapies. The network includes a Cellular Immunotherapy Data Resource (CIDR) that collects information about patients receiving cell-based immunotherapies, which can inform future studies of immunotherapeutic treatments. The IOTN Data Management and Resource Sharing Center (DMRC) supports the data analysis needs of the IOTN, promotes collaboration between IOTN investigators, and outreach of the network to the cancer research community. In addition to their work with the IOTN, the DMRC facilitates the Cancer Moonshot Seminar Series. Highlights of IOTN Research Progress One IOTN research team developed models integrating clinical and molecular data to inform therapeutic options for patients with prostate cancer. Another IOTN study found a combination therapy that reduces immune-related adverse events (irAEs) associated with immune-checkpoint blockade therapy in patients with solid tumors. The IOTN CIDR collects data on long-term outcomes of patients receiving cellular immunotherapies and makes it available to the research community to inform observational, preclinical, and clinical studies. In response to the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, the CIDR rapidly modified its forms to collect data and clinical outcomes of COVID-19 infections among transplant and cell therapy patients. More information about the network can be found on Twitter at @IOTNmoonshot. NCI Center for Cell-Based Therapy (CCT) NCI created a Center for Cell-Based Therapy to focus on the use of living immune cells for cancer immunotherapies. Its mission is to support the discovery and development of new cellular immunotherapies to treat patients with cancer. The center is performing basic research of cell-based cancer therapies, accelerating the translation of cell-based immunotherapy findings to the clinic, training scientists to conduct immunotherapy studies, and providing cancer researchers with access to immunotherapy-related technologies. Cancer Immune Monitoring and Analysis Centers (CIMACs) and the Cancer Immunologic Data Commons (CIDC) Together, the four Cancer Immune Monitoring and Analysis Centers (CIMACs) and the Cancer Immunologic Data Commons (CIDC) form the multidisciplinary CIMAC-CIDC network. The network is addressing the critical importance of biomarkers in the management of cancer patients receiving immunotherapy. Each CIMAC consists of a multidisciplinary group of scientists with basic, translational, clinical, and computational research expertise. CIMACs are providing a wide range of state-of-the-art analyses to characterize the responses of patients in the NCI-funded early-phase immunotherapy trials using validated and standardized platforms. The CIDC facilitates network activities including optimizing data collection methods for immune-related biomarkers, integrating data from immunotherapy clinical trials, and building a biomarker database for use by the immuno-oncology community. Together with a public-private research collaboration called Partnership for Accelerating Cancer Therapies (PACT), the CIMAC-CIDC network is supporting immunology biomarkers assays for more than 40 trials run by NCI national clinical trial networks and pharmaceutical companies. The assays are being used to characterize responses in patients treated in these clinical trials. PACT also facilitates information sharing across government, academia, and industry. Pancreatic Cancer Microenvironment Network (PaCMEN) The Pancreatic Cancer Microenvironment Network was created to conduct research to improve therapeutic outcomes for patients with pancreatic cancer, which is the third most common cause of cancer-related death in the United States. In-depth studies of the pancreatic tumor micronevironment can lead to discoveries of vulnerabilities that could be exploited by immunotherapies. For example, in one PaCMEN study, drugs called angiotensin receptor blockers, which are commonly used to treat hypertension, were shown to modify the tumor microenvironment and enhance the effectiveness of immunotherapy in mice. This research has been translated into two clinical trials for patients with pancreatic cancer (NCT03563248, NCT01821729), leading to remarkable clinical responses. Another group successfully translated their studies to an early-phase combination trial (NCT04161755) with immune checkpoint blockade, chemotherapy, and mRNA neoantigen vaccination in patients with pancreatic cancer. PRE-medical Cancer Immunotherapy Network Canine Trials (PRECINCT) PRECINCT researchers evaluate next-generation immunotherapies and combination immunotherapies in canine patients, which provides not only more effective treatments for these pets but also important insights that could improve the lives of their human counterparts. PRECINCT investigators are conducting canine clinical trials in pet dogs with osteosarcoma, lymphoma, melanoma, and glioma. Two of the canine clinical trials have yielded such encouraging results that early-phase human clinical trials have been initiated for children with osteosarcoma (NCT03900793) and adults with glioblastoma (NCT04642937). Adult Immunotherapy Projects Awarded Cancer Moonshot Funding
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Resources for International Partners - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/resources-for/international-partners
txt: NCI collaborates with foreign governments, non-governmental organizations, and other U.S. government agencies to address the challenges of cancer research and reduce the global burden of cancer. Find resources aimed at reducing the burden of cancer in a population. International Cancer Control Partnership Portal  International Cancer Research Partnership  International Research on Tobacco Use  Smokeless Tobacco and Public Health: A Global Perspective  Enhance your communications plans and programs. Making Health Communication Programs Work (Pink Book)  Making Data Talk: A Workbook  PDQ® - NCI's Comprehensive Database  Collaborate with investigators, advocates, and community groups. African Esophageal Cancer Consortium (AfrECC)  Assay Portal  International Cancer Proteogenome Consortium  International Cancer Screening Network  The International Consortium for the Investigation of Renal Malignancies (I-ConFIRM)  International Lymphoma Epidemiology Consortium  NCI Cohort Consortium Membership  Further your knowledge with intramural training and continuing education opportunities. Implementation Science Training and Education  Summer Curriculum in Cancer Prevention Program  Contact NCI program staff or learn more about the work of the following divisions engaged in global efforts to reduce cancer. Center for Global Health  Division of Cancer Control and Population Sciences: Research Grants Portfolio  Divison of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics: Our Research  Epidemiology and Genomics Research Program: Global Health and Cancer Epidemiology  To explore the work of all NCI Divisions, Offices, and Centers, visit our NCI Organization page. Learn more about the goals and approaches of the Cancer MoonshotSM initiative. About the Cancer MoonshotSM  Blue Ribbon Panel Report 2016  Cancer Currents Blog: Forging Collaborations to Spur Global Progress Against Cancer  The White House Fact Sheet: International Cooperation and Investments as Part of the Cancer Moonshot 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Why Participate in a Clinical Trial? - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/clinical-trials/questions
txt: When you need treatment for cancer, you may want to think about joining a clinical trial. By looking closely at all options, including clinical trials, you are taking an active role in a decision that affects your life. This section has information on the risks and benefits of clinical trials to help you decide.  Deciding to Join a Clinical Trial  Possible Risks in Treatment Clinical Trials  Possible Benefits of Joining a Treatment Clinical Trial  Questions to Ask before Joining a Treatment Clinical Trial  Deciding to Join a Clinical Trial Possible Risks in Treatment Clinical Trials Possible Benefits of Joining a Treatment Clinical Trial Questions to Ask before Joining a Treatment Clinical Trial Deciding to Join a Clinical Trial Should You Join a Clinical Trial? Learn the reasons why you might want to join a cancer clinical trial. Possible Risks in Treatment Clinical Trials Every clinical trial is different, which means risks can also differ. Some common risks include: The study treatment may not be better than, or even as good as, the standard treatment.  Study treatments may have serious side effects that are worse than those of the standard treatment.  You may be required to make more visits to the doctor and have more tests than if you were receiving standard treatment.  You may have extra expenses related to these extra visits, such as travel, housing, and childcare costs.  Possible Benefits of Joining a Treatment Clinical Trial Some of the benefits to joining a treatment clinical trial may include: The trial may help researchers learn more about cancer and help people in the future.  You might have access to a treatment that is under study that may not be available to people outside the trial.  The research team will watch you closely, adding an extra layer of care to your health.  Though not common, if the treatment being studied is more effective than the standard treatment, you may be among the first to benefit.  Questions to Ask before Joining a Treatment Clinical Trial “Thirty people came with her, some angry, some scared and wanting to know why I wanted to experiment on their mom." Learn more about Dr. Osarogiagbon's experience answering patient questions. If you are thinking about joining a clinical trial, here are some questions you may want to ask your doctor and the study research team. Questions about the Trial What is the purpose of the trial?  Why do the researchers believe that the treatment being studied may be better than the one being used now? Why may it not be better?  How long will I be in the trial?  How many visits will I need to make to the hospital or clinic?  What kinds of tests and treatments are involved?  How will the doctor know if the treatment is working?  How will I be told about the trial’s results?  How long do I have to make up my mind about joining this trial?  Who can I speak with about questions I have during and after the trial?  Who will be in charge of my care?  Questions about Risks and Benefits What are the possible side effects or risks of the new treatment?  What are the possible benefits?  How do the possible risks and benefits of this trial compare to those of the standard treatment?  Questions about Your Rights How will my health information be kept private?  If I decide to leave the trial, what other options will I have?  Questions about Costs Which costs do I have to pay if I take part in the trial?  What costs will my health insurance cover?  Who can help answer questions from my insurance company?  Who can I talk with about costs and payments?  Questions about Daily Life How could the trial affect my daily life?  How often will I have to come to the hospital or clinic?  Will I have to stay in the hospital during the clinical trial? If so, how often and for how long?  How far will I need to travel to take part in the trial?  Will I have check-ups after the trial?  Questions about Comparing Choices What are my other treatment choices, including standard treatments?  How does the treatment I would receive in this trial compare with the other treatment choices?  What will happen to my cancer if I decide not to have any treatment? 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Cardiopulmonary Syndromes (PDQ®) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/cardiopulmonary-hp-pdq
txt:  Overview  Dyspnea in Patients With Advanced Cancer  Chronic Cough  Malignant Pleural Effusion  Malignant Pericardial Effusion  Superior Vena Cava Syndrome  Latest Updates to This Summary (02/21/2023)  About This PDQ Summary  Cancer patients often have comorbid medical problems in addition to their underlying malignant disorders.  In fact, patients older than 65 years bear a disproportionate burden of cancer as well as increased prevalence of medical problems such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, heart disease, diabetes, and hypertension.[1]    Whether patients are seen in primary care  or cancer care settings, unexplained symptoms often frustrate physicians and patients.[2] Because many advanced cancers spread to the thorax, symptoms such as dyspnea, cough, chest pain, or palpitations often present a challenge in sorting out the likely cause of the problem and developing appropriate interventions. Evidence-based recommendations describing various approaches to the problems of cancer-related fatigue, anorexia, depression, and dyspnea have been published.[3] Cancer patients are often also at higher risk of developing pulmonary infections. Clinicians caring for cancer patients should be familiar with the assessment and treatment of common conditions that manifest as chest symptoms.  In addition, these clinicians need to be familiar with some cancer-specific aspects of chest symptoms and syndromes.  Dyspnea is a common symptom of certain cancers such as lung cancer and is also common in patients with numerous advanced cancers.  Dyspnea is often multifactorial.  Optimal treatment requires an understanding of contributing etiologies and pathophysiologies to direct therapeutic interventions as clinically appropriate. Important cardiopulmonary syndromes include the following: Malignant pleural effusion. Malignant pericardial effusion. Superior vena cava syndrome. Lymphangitic carcinomatosis. In this summary, unless otherwise stated, evidence and practice issues as they relate to adults are discussed.  The evidence and application to practice related to children may differ significantly from information related to adults.  When specific information about the care of children is available, it is summarized under its own heading. Yancik R, Ganz PA, Varricchio CG, et al.: Perspectives on comorbidity and cancer in older patients: approaches to expand the knowledge base. J Clin Oncol 19 (4): 1147-51, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Komaroff AL: Symptoms: in the head or in the brain? Ann Intern Med 134 (9 Pt 1): 783-5, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Dy SM, Lorenz KA, Naeim A, et al.: Evidence-based recommendations for cancer fatigue, anorexia, depression, and dyspnea. J Clin Oncol 26 (23): 3886-95, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Introduction Pathophysiology and Etiology Assessment Management of DyspneaManagement of underlying causesSymptomatic managementGeneral support measures Current Clinical Trials Management of underlying causes Symptomatic management General support measures Dyspnea is defined as an uncomfortable awareness of breathing.  It is a subjective experience involving many factors that modulate the quality and intensity of its perception. Patients with comparable degrees of functional lung impairment and disease burden may describe varying intensities of dyspnea.  Patients use a host of different words and phrases to describe the sensation of breathlessness. Terms such as tightness and suffocating are sometimes used.[1] Reports on the frequency of dyspnea also vary, depending on the setting and the extent of disease.[2]     In one study, 49% of a general cancer population reported breathlessness, and 20% rated their breathlessness as moderate to severe.[3] Patients with advanced cancer experience this symptom more frequently and more intensely than do patients with limited disease.  One study found that 75  of 135 patients with advanced cancer reporting to an outpatient palliative care clinic were experiencing moderate-to-severe dyspnea.[4]   Breathlessness was a complaint at presentation in 60% of 289 patients with lung cancer.[5] Results of a large study showed that 70% of patients suffered from dyspnea in the last 6 weeks of life.[6]       About one-third of  patients who could report the intensity of their dyspnea rated it as moderate to severe. Another study revealed that one-half of patients with advanced cancer scored their dyspnea as moderate to severe.[7] The pathophysiological mechanisms of breathlessness are numerous and complex.[8]   Peripheral and central mechanisms as well as mechanical and chemical pathways are involved with a variety of sensory afferent sources.[9-11] The qualities of dyspnea can be appreciated as work/effort, tightness, and air hunger.  The experience of excess work and effort  is caused by sensory-perceptual mechanisms similar to those involved in muscles exercising.  Tightness is caused by stimulation of airway receptors with bronchoconstriction. The intensity of air hunger and unsatisfied inspiration is caused by the following:[12] Imbalances of respiratory drive. Outgoing signals from the brain. Feedback from afferents in the respiratory system. The direct causes of dyspnea in patients with advanced cancer are numerous; categorizing them can assist in the etiologic work-up. One approach is to divide direct causes into the following four groups: Direct tumor effects such as intrinsic or extrinsic airway obstruction, pleural involvement, parenchymal involvement by either primary or metastatic disease,  superior vena cava syndrome, lymphangitic carcinomatosis, pericardial effusion, and postobstructive pneumonitis. Indirect tumor effects such as pneumonia, a pulmonary embolus, paralysis of a hemidiaphragm, or weakening of the respiratory muscles from sarcopenia. Treatment-related causes such as pulmonary fibrosis secondary to radiation therapy or chemotherapy or chemotherapy-induced cardiomyopathy, and immunotherapy-related pneumonitis from targeted therapy. Although checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy–related pneumonitis is uncommon, it can be potentially severe or fatal.[13,14] This drug-induced pneumonitis is a diagnosis of exclusion; other differential diagnoses, including infection and worsening malignancy, need to be excluded. Causes unrelated to the cancer. These include chronic obstructive airway disease, congestive heart failure, anemia, certain acidotic states, and bronchospasm. Functional causes (e.g., anxiety). One study found that in patients experiencing dyspnea from advanced cancer, a median of five different abnormalities could have contributed to their shortness of breath.[7]   Spirometry was abnormal in 93% of  100 patients examined, with 5% having obstructive patterns, 41% restrictive patterns, and 47% mixed patterns; 49% of patients had lung cancer, 91% had abnormal chest radiographs, and 65% had parenchymal or pleural involvement. These results indicate that a subset of patients will experience shortness of breath without any apparent lung involvement. The potentially correctable causes of dyspnea included: Hypoxia (40%). Anemia (20%). Bronchospasm (52%). No significant association between the type of respiratory impairment and the degree of dyspnea was found. Most of these patients were current or former smokers. Most patients also had a significant lowering of their maximum inspiratory pressures, suggesting severe respiratory muscle dysfunction.[7] This finding was duplicated in another study.[4]   Of patients admitted to hospice care, 34% had histories of cardiac disease, and 24% had histories of respiratory disease.[6]   Only 39% of  terminally ill patients who reported dyspnea had lung or pleural involvement. The etiology of dyspnea could not be clearly identified in approximately one-quarter of  patients. Another study found that 49% of lung cancer patients presented with airflow obstruction.[7,15] Respiratory muscle dysfunction is  an underrecognized factor contributing to dyspnea. Causes of respiratory muscle dysfunction include:[16] Neuromuscular disease. Malnutrition. Deficiencies of potassium, magnesium, and inorganic phosphate. Poor oxygenation, muscle fatigue, abnormal cortisol and catecholamine levels, and circulating cytokines are also implicated.[16] Although it is commonly believed that anxiety is associated with breathlessness, researchers found that anxiety and shortness of breath do not invariably go together.[7]  One study demonstrated that the involvement of the lungs by cancer, anxiety, and poor maximal inspiratory pressures were correlates of the intensity of dyspnea in patients with advanced cancer.[4] The multidimensional nature of dyspnea must be noted in the complicated assessment of this symptom. Patient-reported outcome is the gold standard for assessment of dyspnea. There is no consensus on what constitutes the best instrument for assessing dyspnea, but following are some of the tools used: Visual analog and numerical rating scales appear to be useful and are commonly utilized.[8,17-19] The Borg Scale is occasionally utilized.[17] The Cancer Dyspnea Scale is a multidimensional instrument, initially developed in Japan for patients with lung cancer and later translated into Swedish. This scale has been shown to be valid and reliable in patients with advanced lung cancer.   The subscales measure sense of effort (physical dimension), sense of anxiety (psychological dimension), and sense of discomfort.[20] These tools are limited, however, because they are unidimensional and do not account for the relative contribution of different factors to a patient’s perception of breathlessness. Assessment should include the impact of dyspnea on the patient’s functional status and appreciation of  the dynamic component of dyspnea—namely, exertional dyspnea. Objective signs such as tachypnea or the use of accessory breathing muscles frequently do not match a patient’s perception of dyspnea and the degree of functional impairment it causes. Numerous factors, including psychosocial issues, may affect a patient’s experience of dyspnea.  Pulmonary function tests, with few exceptions, play a limited role in the assessment of this syndrome.  Lack of a clear understanding of the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying dyspnea hampers the clinician’s overall ability to effectively manage it.[8,17] A comprehensive history and examination are essential to an accurate assessment of dyspnea.[8,17]      The temporal onset, qualities of the symptom, associated symptoms, precipitating and relieving events or activities, and responses to medications should be reviewed. Sudden onset may herald a pulmonary embolism or infection, whereas gradual onset may suggest the development of a pleural effusion. A history of obstructive airways or cardiac disease can shed some light on possible underlying causes. Investigations such as measuring oxygen saturation can be useful in determining whether a patient is hypoxic. In the setting of advanced, incurable cancer, arterial blood gasses play a limited role. Although one-third of patients in the study looking at checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy–related pneumonitis were asymptomatic, the most common presenting symptoms were the following:[13] Dyspnea (53%). Cough (35%). Melanoma and non-small cell lung cancer were the most common cancers treated in this study. Interestingly, the duration of treatment before the onset of pneumonitis was quite variable, with a median time to onset of 2.8 months (range, 9 days–19 months). In addition, pneumonitis seemed to occur earlier in patients who received combination therapy than in those who received monotherapy (median, 2.7 months vs. 4.6 months).[13] Diagnostic tests that may help to determine the etiology of dyspnea include the following:[7] Chest imaging by radiography. Computer-assisted tomography. Complete blood counts. Oxygen saturation at rest and with exercise. Pulmonary function tests, to a much lesser extent. Maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP) measurements may be helpful, particularly if no apparent cause can be found.   MIP is a reliable functional test of the strength of the diaphragm and other respiratory muscles. Functional assessments such as the 6-minute walk test and exercise ergometry may also provide valuable information about the severity and impact of dyspnea.[21,22] As with all symptoms, it is essential to identify and treat the underlying cause(s) of dyspnea if possible and when appropriate. Examples of specific underlying causes (some of them potentially reversible) and their treatments include the following: Tumor obstruction (upper airways, bronchus, postobstructive pneumonitis, or superior vena cava): Radiation therapy, hormone therapy, or chemotherapy for sensitive tumors. Bronchoscope-guided cauterization or laser ablation of intraluminal masses in large airways can be considered when such technology and expertise is available.[23]    Stenting of large airways with expandable stents when the obstruction is extraluminal has been described. Carcinomatous lymphangitis: A trial of corticosteroids, e.g., dexamethasone. The optimal dose is not clear. Chemotherapy should be considered in sensitive cancers. Superior vena cava obstruction:  Chemotherapy for sensitive tumors, radiation therapy, stenting, opioids for dyspnea, and/or steroids as appropriate for the clinical context. Bronchospasms: Bronchodilators. The indiscriminate use of bronchodilators, particularly in the absence of bronchospasm, is discouraged.  The treatment of underlying chronic obstructive disease should be optimized with bronchodilators and inhaled corticosteroids as appropriate, particularly because many patients may be current or former smokers. Postradiation bronchiolitis obliterans: A rare complication that  occurs in 0.8% to 2.9% of women receiving radiation therapy for breast cancer.[24] Patients are usually treated with corticosteroids. Pleural effusions: Pleural aspiration by thoracentesis or chest drain. Pleurodesis in selected patients with recurrent effusions should be considered. Indwelling catheters are now available for patients with recurrent effusions who are not suitable for pleurodesis. Pericardial effusions: Drainage for immediate relief and possibly intrapericardial chemotherapy or definitive surgery, depending on the clinical context and goals of care. Gross ascites: Abdominal paracentesis to relieve the diaphragmatic splinting. Cardiac failure: Diuretics and other drugs as appropriate. Chest infections: Antibiotics and chest physiotherapy when appropriate. Anemia: Blood transfusions in select patients. Pulmonary embolism:  Anticoagulate when appropriate. Checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy–related pneumonitis:    For patients who present with a severity of grade 2 or higher (based on the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events [25]), withholding of  drug treatment, administration of corticosteroids, and close follow-up. If the pneumonitis worsens, additional immunosuppression may be considered. However, the benefit of this approach is not clear. Anxiety: Psychotropic medications and psychotherapy. Symptomatic management of dyspnea is based primarily on the following: Oxygen therapy. Opioids for palliation of dyspnea. Treatment of underlying causes (e.g., superimposed infection), when appropriate. Opioids represent an extremely effective treatment for dyspnea in cancer patients. Fear of side effects should not prevent the appropriate use of opioids in this setting. Most authorities believe that, if used appropriately, opioids do not hasten death in dyspneic cancer patients; rather, they reduce physical and psychological distress and exhaustion, and early use improves quality of life.[17,26,27]     Clinically significant hypoventilation following opioid therapy depends largely on the history of previous exposure to opioids and the rate of increase of the opioid dose.  As with opioid use in pain management, the principles of starting at a regular low dose in opioid-naïve patients followed by appropriate dose titration applies. Opioid therapy for dyspnea is administered similarly to, and often concurrent with, opioid therapy for pain control.  Most of the available evidence supports the role of opioids in relieving dyspnea in malignant and nonmalignant conditions.[28,29][Level of evidence: I];[30-32][Level of evidence: II] Anecdotal and experimental evidence suggest a role for nebulized opioid administration in the treatment of dyspnea.[33-35] Opioid receptors are present on sensory nerve endings in the airways; however, nebulization is an inefficient way of administering drugs.[33]      Pharmacokinetic studies suggest that the systemic bioavailability of nebulized morphine is extremely poor and erratic, varying from 4% to 8%.[36]   Some patients may experience claustrophobia. Available evidence does not support the clinical use of nebulized opioids. More clinical trials are needed to better determine the role of this mode of treatment. Patients who are hypoxic on room air are likely to benefit from oxygen therapy, probably through a decrease in the chemoreceptor input to the respiratory center and the brain cortex.  In two controlled trials, cancer patients with dyspnea who were randomly assigned in a crossover design showed significant improvement in their dyspnea.[37,38][Level of evidence: I] The role of supplemental oxygen has also been examined in patients without hypoxemia in a large randomized controlled trial.  Supplemental oxygen given at 2 L/min did not significantly improve dyspnea, compared with supplemental air.[39] Therefore, supplemental oxygen is recommended for cancer patients with hypoxemia but not for those who are nonhypoxemic. Other investigators have examined the effect of other oxygen delivery modalities on dyspnea in cancer patients, such as:[40] High-flow oxygen. High-flow oxygen devices deliver up to 40 L of humidified and heated oxygen per minute, and may reduce the intensity of dyspnea in patients who do not respond to low-flow oxygen.[40] Noninvasive ventilation with bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP).   BiPAP has also been shown in several randomized controlled trials to alleviate dyspnea among hospitalized cancer patients,[40,41] particularly in patients with hypoventilation. These interventions may be reasonable options for patients with hypoxemia and refractory dyspnea despite the use of low-flow supplemental oxygen. Other options suggested for symptomatic treatment include: Methylxanthines. Sedatives. Tranquilizers. Nebulized local anesthetics. Antiprostaglandins. The role of methylxanthines in cancer-related dyspnea has not been clarified. Chlorpromazine and promethazine have been shown to decrease dyspnea without affecting ventilation in noncancer patients, but their role in cancer-related dyspnea is unclear. Four out of five randomized controlled trials failed to demonstrate any benefit for using benzodiazepines in cancer patients.[17];[42][Level of evidence: I] One randomized single-blind study suggested that the combination of two scheduled medications (subcutaneous morphine and subcutaneous midazolam) and one as needed (subcutaneous morphine)  for episodes of breakthrough dyspnea is more effective than the other evaluated combinations for controlling breakthrough dyspnea and requires further study.[43][Level of evidence: I] The role of benzodiazepines appears to be limited to treatment of dyspnea that is considered a somatic manifestation of a panic disorder or to use when a patient has concurrent severe anxiety. 

A randomized placebo-controlled trial of 432 patients failed to show improvement in dyspnea or anxiety with  the nonbenzodiazepine anxiolytic drug buspirone compared with placebo in cancer patients who had moderate to severe dyspnea, although the dose of 20 mg was relatively low.[44][Level of evidence: I] Buspirone cannot be recommended at this time for the treatment of dyspnea in cancer patients. No evidence supports the use of nebulized local anesthetics for the treatment of breathlessness. Given the role inflammation may play in cancer and dyspnea, dexamethasone has been used for symptomatic treatment of dyspnea. A randomized controlled trial prospectively evaluated dexamethasone in a highly selected group of ambulatory patients who had an average dyspnea score of 4 or greater (on a numerical scale of 0–10).[45][Level of evidence: I]  Patients were randomly assigned to receive dexamethasone 8 mg bid for 1 week, then 4 mg bid for 1 week versus a matching placebo.  In-person assessments were taken at baseline, day 7, and day 14, as well as telephone assessments every other day from day 1 to day 28. Assessments included average dyspnea intensity, activity-adjusted dyspnea, and dyspnea unpleasantness via a numerical rating scale. Dyspnea was also measured via maximal inspiratory pressure and spirometry. The trial was terminated at the second preplanned interim analysis for futility. A clinically meaningful improvement in dyspnea was seen in both the placebo and the dexamethasone groups, leading the authors to conclude that high-dose dexamethasone should not be given routinely to alleviate cancer-related dyspnea. Interestingly, the patients who took dexamethasone had significantly better appetite and well-being scores but worse anxiety, depression, and adverse events. In addition to adequate pharmacological therapies, a number of nonpharmacological measures are suggested. These include: Pursed-lip breathing. Diaphragmatic breathing and muscle training. Cold air directed across the cheek. Meditation. Relaxation training. Biofeedback techniques. Psychotherapy. The effectiveness of these measures in relieving breathlessness appears to be variable. Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Wilcock A, Crosby V, Hughes A, et al.: Descriptors of breathlessness in patients with cancer and other cardiorespiratory diseases. J Pain Symptom Manage 23 (3): 182-9, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Ripamonti C, Fulfaro F, Bruera E: Dyspnoea in patients with advanced cancer: incidence, causes and treatments. Cancer Treat Rev 24 (1): 69-80, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Dudgeon DJ, Kristjanson L, Sloan JA, et al.: Dyspnea in cancer patients: prevalence and associated factors. J Pain Symptom Manage 21 (2): 95-102, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Bruera E, Schmitz B, Pither J, et al.: The frequency and correlates of dyspnea in patients with advanced cancer. J Pain Symptom Manage 19 (5): 357-62, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Muers MF, Round CE: Palliation of symptoms in non-small cell lung cancer: a study by the Yorkshire Regional Cancer Organisation Thoracic Group. Thorax 48 (4): 339-43, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Reuben DB, Mor V: Dyspnea in terminally ill cancer patients. Chest 89 (2): 234-6, 1986. [PUBMED Abstract] Dudgeon DJ, Lertzman M: Dyspnea in the advanced cancer patient. J Pain Symptom Manage 16 (4): 212-9, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Ripamonti C, Bruera E: Dyspnea: pathophysiology and assessment. J Pain Symptom Manage 13 (4): 220-32, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Widdicombe J: Lung afferent activity: implications for respiratory sensation. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 167 (1): 2-8, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Lee LY: Respiratory sensations evoked by activation of bronchopulmonary C-fibers. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 167 (1): 26-35, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Undem BJ, Nassenstein C: Airway nerves and dyspnea associated with inflammatory airway disease. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 167 (1): 36-44, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Parshall MB, Schwartzstein RM, Adams L, et al.: An official American Thoracic Society statement: update on the mechanisms, assessment, and management of dyspnea. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 185 (4): 435-52, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Naidoo J, Wang X, Woo KM, et al.: Pneumonitis in Patients Treated With Anti-Programmed Death-1/Programmed Death Ligand 1 Therapy. J Clin Oncol 35 (7): 709-717, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Khunger M, Rakshit S, Pasupuleti V, et al.: Incidence of Pneumonitis With Use of Programmed Death 1 and Programmed Death-Ligand 1 Inhibitors in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Trials. Chest 152 (2): 271-281, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Congleton J, Muers MF: The incidence of airflow obstruction in bronchial carcinoma, its relation to breathlessness, and response to bronchodilator therapy. Respir Med 89 (4): 291-6, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Mancini DM, LaManca J, Henson D: The relation of respiratory muscle function to dyspnea in patients with heart failure. Heart Fail  8: 183-9, 1992. Dudgeon DJ, Rosenthal S: Management of dyspnea and cough in patients with cancer. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 10 (1): 157-71, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Bausewein C, Farquhar M, Booth S, et al.: Measurement of breathlessness in advanced disease: a systematic review. Respir Med 101 (3): 399-410, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Dorman S, Byrne A, Edwards A: Which measurement scales should we use to measure breathlessness in palliative care? A systematic review. Palliat Med 21 (3): 177-91, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Henoch I, Bergman B, Gaston-Johansson F: Validation of a Swedish version of the Cancer Dyspnea Scale. J Pain Symptom Manage 31 (4): 353-61, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] American Thoracic Society, American College of Chest Physicians: ATS/ACCP Statement on cardiopulmonary exercise testing. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 167 (2): 211-77, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] ATS Committee on Proficiency Standards for Clinical Pulmonary Function Laboratories: ATS statement: guidelines for the six-minute walk test. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 166 (1): 111-7, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Mantovani G, Astara G, Manca G, et al.: Endoscopic laser ablation as palliative treatment of endobronchial, nonresectable, or recurrent lung cancer: assessment of its impact on quality of life. Clin Lung Cancer 1 (4): 277-85; discussion 286, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Epler GR, Kelly EM: Systematic review of postradiotherapy bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia in women with breast cancer. Oncologist 19 (12): 1216-26, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] National Cancer Institute: Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE), Version 5.0. Bethesda, Md: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, 2017. Available online. Last accessed Feb. 14, 2024. Bruera E, Ripamonti C: Dyspnea in patients with advanced cancer. In: Berger A, Portenoy RK, Weissman DE, eds.: Principles and Practice of Supportive Oncology. Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1998, pp 295-307. Kloke M, Cherny N; ESMO Guidelines Committee: Treatment of dyspnoea in advanced cancer patients: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines. Ann Oncol 26 (Suppl 5): v169-73, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Bruera E, MacEachern T, Ripamonti C, et al.: Subcutaneous morphine for dyspnea in cancer patients. Ann Intern Med 119 (9): 906-7, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Allard P, Lamontagne C, Bernard P, et al.: How effective are supplementary doses of opioids for dyspnea in terminally ill cancer patients? A randomized continuous sequential clinical trial. J Pain Symptom Manage 17 (4): 256-65, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Bruera E, Macmillan K, Pither J, et al.: Effects of morphine on the dyspnea of terminal cancer patients. J Pain Symptom Manage 5 (6): 341-4, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Cohen MH, Anderson AJ, Krasnow SH, et al.: Continuous intravenous infusion of morphine for severe dyspnea. South Med J 84 (2): 229-34, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Boyd KJ, Kelly M: Oral morphine as symptomatic treatment of dyspnoea in patients with advanced cancer. Palliat Med 11 (4): 277-81, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Zeppetella G: Nebulized morphine in the palliation of dyspnoea. Palliat Med 11 (4): 267-75, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Farncombe M, Chater S: Clinical application of nebulized opioids for treatment of dyspnoea in patients with malignant disease. Support Care Cancer 2 (3): 184-7, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Farncombe M, Chater S, Gillin A: The use of nebulized opioids for breathlessness: a chart review. Palliat Med 8 (4): 306-12, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Masood AR, Thomas SH: Systemic absorption of nebulized morphine compared with oral morphine in healthy subjects. Br J Clin Pharmacol 41 (3): 250-2, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Bruera E, de Stoutz N, Velasco-Leiva A, et al.: Effects of oxygen on dyspnoea in hypoxaemic terminal-cancer patients. Lancet 342 (8862): 13-4, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Bruera E, Schoeller T, MacEachern T: Symptomatic benefit of supplemental oxygen in hypoxemic patients with terminal cancer: the use of the N of 1 randomized controlled trial. J Pain Symptom Manage 7 (6): 365-8, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Abernethy AP, McDonald CF, Frith PA, et al.: Effect of palliative oxygen versus room air in relief of breathlessness in patients with refractory dyspnoea: a double-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 376 (9743): 784-93, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Hui D, Morgado M, Chisholm G, et al.: High-flow oxygen and bilevel positive airway pressure for persistent dyspnea in patients with advanced cancer: a phase II randomized trial. J Pain Symptom Manage 46 (4): 463-73, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Nava S, Ferrer M, Esquinas A, et al.: Palliative use of non-invasive ventilation in end-of-life patients with solid tumours: a randomised feasibility trial. Lancet Oncol 14 (3): 219-27, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Moroni M, Porta C, Gualtieri G, et al.: Inhaled sodium cromoglycate to treat cough in advanced lung cancer patients. Br J Cancer 74 (2): 309-11, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Navigante AH, Cerchietti LC, Castro MA, et al.: Midazolam as adjunct therapy to morphine in the alleviation of severe dyspnea perception in patients with advanced cancer. J Pain Symptom Manage 31 (1): 38-47, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Peoples AR, Bushunow PW, Garland SN, et al.: Buspirone for management of dyspnea in cancer patients receiving chemotherapy: a randomized placebo-controlled URCC CCOP study. Support Care Cancer 24 (3): 1339-47, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Hui D, Puac V, Shelal Z, et al.: Effect of dexamethasone on dyspnoea in patients with cancer (ABCD): a parallel-group, double-blind, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet Oncol 23 (10): 1321-1331, 2022. [PUBMED Abstract] In some patients, chronic coughing may be the source of major suffering.[1]          Chronic cough can do the following: Cause pain. Interfere with sleep. Aggravate dyspnea. Worsen fatigue. The causes of cough can be classified much like the causes of dyspnea. One approach to chronic cough in palliative care patients is to consider the differential diagnoses summarized below: Malignancy-related causes of cough, e.g., direct irritation by the presence of a tumor or tracheo-esophageal fistula. Drug-related cough: rule out cough induced by medications such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. Other noncancer causes of cough: rule out asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, postnasal drip, reflux issues, and chronic heart failure. The optimal therapy for chronic cough is treatment of the underlying disorder, such as: Radiation  therapy for the underlying endobronchial tumor mass irritating the airway. Stenting of tracheo-esophageal fistula. Drainage of a pleural effusion. Corticosteroids for lymphangitic carcinomatosis. Cough-suppressing agents such as opioids are commonly utilized.  Anecdotal evidence suggests a role for inhaled local anesthetics, which should be utilized judiciously and sparingly; they are unpleasant to the taste and obtund the gag reflex, and anaphylactic reactions to preservatives in these solutions have been documented. Opioid and nonopioid antitussives, such as dextromethorphan, may act synergistically, but further studies are required to confirm this hypothesis.[1] Gabapentin was found to be efficacious compared with placebo for chronic refractory cough, although this study did not specifically include cancer patients.[2] In cases of increased sputum production, expectorants and mucolytics have been employed, but the effects have not been well evaluated.  Inhaled sodium cromoglycate has shown promise as a safe method of controlling chronic coughing related to lung cancer.[3] Dudgeon DJ, Rosenthal S: Management of dyspnea and cough in patients with cancer. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 10 (1): 157-71, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Ryan NM, Birring SS, Gibson PG: Gabapentin for refractory chronic cough: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 380 (9853): 1583-9, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Moroni M, Porta C, Gualtieri G, et al.: Inhaled sodium cromoglycate to treat cough in advanced lung cancer patients. Br J Cancer 74 (2): 309-11, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Significance Pathogenesis Assessment Management of Malignant Pleural EffusionsTo treat or not to treatThoracentesisChronic long-term indwelling tunneled pleural cathetersUse of pleural sclerosing agents after chest tube drainageSurgical treatment Current Clinical Trials To treat or not to treat Thoracentesis Chronic long-term indwelling tunneled pleural catheters Use of pleural sclerosing agents after chest tube drainage Surgical treatment Malignant pleural effusions are a common complication of malignancy, and malignancy
is a common cause of pleural effusions in general.  Malignancy accounts for
roughly 40% of symptomatic pleural effusions, with congestive heart failure and
infection being the other leading causes.[1] The cancers that account for approximately 75% of
all malignancy-associated effusions are the following: Lung cancer. Breast cancer. Lymphoma. Leukemia. Significant use of health care resources is
attributable to malignant effusions, with approximately 100,000 cases per year
being diagnosed in the United States and 43 cases being detected per 100,000
hospital admissions.[2] The normal pleural fluid space is occupied with approximately 10 cc of fluid with 2 g/dL
protein. A pleural effusion is an accumulation of an abnormal amount of fluid between
the visceral and parietal pleura of the chest.  Normally, pleural fluid is absorbed by
pulmonary venous capillaries (80%–90%), with some of it also absorbed by pleural
lymphatics.  Malignant effusions are usually exudative rather than transudative.
Exudative effusions exhibit any one of the following characteristics:[3] Pleural fluid to serum protein ratio greater than 0.5. Pleural fluid to serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) ratio greater than  0.6. Pleural fluid LDH greater than two-thirds of the upper limit of serum LDH. These exudative malignant effusions are generally caused by: Pleural metastases. Disruption of pulmonary capillary endothelium. Malignant obstruction of pleural lymphatics. Paramalignant effusions may result from chemotherapy, radiation therapy, atelectasis, or lymph node involvement. Common symptoms associated with malignant pleural effusions include: Dyspnea. Cough. Chest discomfort. About 20% of patients may experience weight loss and malaise.
A chest x-ray is most commonly used for radiographic assessment.  About 175 cc of
pleural fluid will cause a blunted costophrenic angle discernible on chest radiography.  A
chest computerized tomography scan is more sensitive than a simple chest x-ray and is
often used for assessment of loculated effusions because, in some instances, up to 500 cc
of loculated fluid can be obscured behind the dome of the diaphragm.[1] Not all pleural effusions detected in cancer patients will
turn out to be malignant effusions.  Cancer patients are prone to developing conditions
such as:[1] Congestive heart failure. Pneumonia. Pulmonary embolism. Malnutrition. Associated low serum albumin. Each
of these conditions may cause a symptomatic effusion for which the clinical management would  
substantially differ from the management of a malignant effusion.  For this reason, 
cytologic assessment is important.  Pleural fluid cytology requires a minimum sample of
250 cc.  The morphology of cells obtained from the pleural space can be difficult to
assess because of mesothelial and macrophage abnormalities.  The diagnostic sensitivity
of pleural fluid cytology is approximately 65%, with a specificity of 97%.[1] Flow cytometry can be applied to these specimens and is
often useful, especially for assessment of lymphomas. Thoracoscopy
and pleural biopsy are rarely needed for a definitive diagnosis, but these techniques may be useful when routine pleural fluid
collection and assessment are difficult because of loculation of the effusion. Thoracoscopy-guided biopsy is generally performed under local anesthesia and has a yield of more than 80%, with a lower risk of complications than thoracotomy. Pleural effusions are generally markers of advanced, unresectable disease or disease
progression.  The median survival for patients with malignant pleural effusions is around 3 to 4 months.[4,5]   Because a paramalignant effusion resulting from pneumonia or atelectasis may be present, the cytology should be confirmed before major treatment decisions are made.  Once the cytology has been confirmed, the management strategy depends on the underlying primary malignancy and the number and type of previous therapies.  For example, patients with newly diagnosed small cell carcinoma or malignant lymphoma are very likely to respond to systemic chemotherapy; however, patients who have already failed several lines of chemotherapy for gastric or ovarian cancer are unlikely to obtain significant palliation with systemic therapy. About three-quarters of patients exhibit symptoms such as cough, dyspnea, and chest discomfort.  Such patients may benefit from efforts to reduce the fluid burden, depending on the following: Their performance status. Their expected survival. Their preference for risks versus benefits. The literature on the efficacy of treatment for pleural effusions is difficult to interpret because of the paucity of randomized trials, and the wide variability in the response criteria and the timing and duration of follow-up in uncontrolled trials.[6,7]     Generally, the goal of therapy is palliation of symptoms.  Measures of success may include: Complete drainage of the effusion. Lung re-expansion. Lack of fluid reaccumulation (i.e., duration of response). Subjective report of symptom relief. The choice of treatment depends on patient prognosis, functional status,  and goals of care. Thoracentesis involves percutaneous insertion of a needle for drainage of the effusion.  Thoracentesis is not expected to permanently resolve the problem but rather to alleviate symptoms that are acute and severe.  The use of thoracentesis is also appropriate as a therapeutic trial to determine whether fluid drainage is beneficial when the relationship between symptoms and effusion is unclear. Most effusions will reaccumulate a few days after thoracentesis. The reaccumulation rate is approximately 98% by day 30.[8]  Repeated thoracenteses carry the potential risks of bleeding, infection, and pneumothorax.  Other potential complications of thoracentesis include noncardiogenic pulmonary edema from rapid lung re-expansion (usually with the rapid removal of >1,500 cc) and pleural shock caused by an excessive vagal response to penetration of the parietal pleura.  Any of these complications may be lethal, especially for the cancer patient with poor cardiopulmonary reserve. Indwelling pleural catheters (IPCs) represent an alternative to pleurodesis for patients with malignant pleural effusion whose dyspnea has responded to thoracentesis.  IPCs are relatively contraindicated in patients with a short life expectancy, pleural infections, multiloculated collections, and chylothorax.   The insertion of chronic long-term indwelling tunneled pleural catheters is useful against recurrent and symptomatic malignant pleural effusions, including for patients with trapped lung.  These tunneled pleural catheters allow up to 96% of patients to achieve symptom improvement, with spontaneous pleurodesis occurring in up to 44% of patients.[9] Published results indicate significantly shorter hospital stays (1 day) for patients with IPCs versus the doxycycline pleurodesis group (6 days).  In the IPC group, spontaneous pleurodesis was achieved in 42 of 91 patients. Both the IPC group and doxycycline pleurodesis group reported modest improvement in quality of life (QOL) and dyspnea.[10] A randomized controlled trial comparing IPC and talc pleurodesis showed similar reduction of dyspnea (24 mm of 100 mm) and similar QOL.[11] IPC use was associated with a shorter initial hospitalization and lower rates of re-treatment, with a spontaneous pleurodesis rate of 51%. However, there were also higher rates of adverse effects, such as infections and catheter blockage. A second randomized controlled trial compared the effect of IPC versus talc pleurodesis on the total number of hospitalization days from procedure to death or to 12 months.[12] There was a statistically significant reduction in the number of hospitalization days for patients with IPCs compared with those who received talc pleurodesis (median,10 days [interquartile range (IQR), 3–17] vs. 12 days [IQR, 7–21], respectively; P = .03). IPC use also resulted in fewer hospitalization days related to pleural effusion management and fewer additional invasive pleural drainage procedures. There were no significant differences in improvement in breathlessness or QOL between the two procedures. The choice between IPC and pleurodesis should be based on patient preference and local resource availability. Chemical sclerosants may be administered through a chest tube to create
inflammation and subsequent fusion of the parietal and visceral pleura so that fluid
cannot reaccumulate in this potential space. This kind of fusion is called pleurodesis.
Numerous chemical agents can cause the irritation necessary to produce pleurodesis.  The
ideal agent would produce effective pleurodesis with minimal cost and minimal side effects. 
Agents that have been studied include: Chemotherapeutic agents (bleomycin, cisplatin,
etoposide, doxorubicin, mitomycin-C, fluorouracil). Antibiotics (doxycycline, minocycline,
tetracycline). Infectious agents (Corynebacterium parvum). Biological agents (interferon
beta, interleukin-2). Bovine dermal collagen.[13][Level of evidence: II] Other agents (talc, methylprednisolone). Several uncontrolled
trials and case series have reported the efficacy of pleurodesis,[14];[15,16][Level of evidence: II];[17,18]  as have  numerous
randomized trials.[19-25][Level of evidence: I]    A meta-analysis of pleurodesis studies that were reported between 1966 and 1992 indicated
that about two-thirds of patients respond to pleurodesis and that tetracyclines (or
tetracycline replacement agents, such as doxycycline and minocycline), bleomycin, and
talc appear to be the most effective agents.[26] A prospective, randomized study of video-assisted thoracoscopic pleurodesis with talc versus doxycycline in 33 patients with malignant pleural effusion suggested that talc provides superior short-term and long-term results.[27][Level of evidence: I] Talc appears to be the least expensive agent, at least when given as a
slurry rather than by video-assisted thoracoscopic talc insufflation.[25][Level of evidence: I]    Bleomycin, however, is the only
agent approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration  for the prevention of
recurrent pleural effusions.[1] An observational cohort study investigated the use of intrapleural urokinase in 48 patients with loculated pleural effusions or trapped lungs. Lung reexpansion and resolution of dyspnea occurred in approximately 60% of patients, suggesting that intrapleural urokinase may be useful in treating loculated pleural effusions or trapped lungs in medically inoperable cancer patients.  Most responders successfully maintained pleurodesis when urokinase was followed by minocycline pleurodesis.[28][Level of evidence: II] For rare patients, standard management of the malignant effusion is unsuccessful and
aggressive treatment remains appropriate.  Pleuroperitoneal shunting can be considered
for these patients.  This procedure involves implantation of a shunt with one-way valves
that allow the transfer of fluid from the pleural space to the peritoneal space, in which the
fluid creates less  hazard and is more easily removed.  Another option is surgical
pleurectomy, but this procedure requires general anesthesia.  The risks of significant
acute and chronic pain as well as other morbidity approaches 20% to 25%, and the risk of
1-month mortality is 5% to 10%.[2] Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Maghfoor I, Doll DC, Yarbro JW: Effusions. In: Abeloff MD, Armitage  JO, Lichter AS, et al., eds.: Clinical Oncology. Churchill Livingstone, 2000, pp 922-49. Fiocco M, Krasna MJ: The management of malignant pleural and pericardial effusions. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 11 (2): 253-65, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Light RW: Useful tests on the pleural fluid in the management of patients with pleural effusions. Curr Opin Pulm Med 5 (4): 245-9, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Burrows CM, Mathews WC, Colt HG: Predicting survival in patients with recurrent symptomatic malignant pleural effusions: an assessment of the prognostic values of physiologic, morphologic, and quality of life measures of extent of disease. Chest 117 (1): 73-8, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Sahn SA: Malignant pleural effusions. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 22 (6): 607-16, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Tattersall M: Management of malignant pleural effusion. Aust N Z J Med 28 (3): 394-6, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Schafers SJ, Dresler CM: Update on talc, bleomycin, and the tetracyclines in the treatment of malignant pleural effusions. Pharmacotherapy 15 (2): 228-35, 1995 Mar-Apr. [PUBMED Abstract] Anderson CB, Philpott GW, Ferguson TB: The treatment of malignant pleural effusions. Cancer 33 (4): 916-22, 1974. [PUBMED Abstract] Tremblay A, Michaud G: Single-center experience with 250 tunnelled pleural catheter insertions for malignant pleural effusion. Chest 129 (2): 362-8, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Putnam JB, Light RW, Rodriguez RM, et al.: A randomized comparison of indwelling pleural catheter and doxycycline pleurodesis in the management of malignant pleural effusions. Cancer 86 (10): 1992-9, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Davies HE, Mishra EK, Kahan BC, et al.: Effect of an indwelling pleural catheter vs chest tube and talc pleurodesis for relieving dyspnea in patients with malignant pleural effusion: the TIME2 randomized controlled trial. JAMA 307 (22): 2383-9, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Thomas R, Fysh ETH, Smith NA, et al.: Effect of an Indwelling Pleural Catheter vs Talc Pleurodesis on Hospitalization Days in Patients With Malignant Pleural Effusion: The AMPLE Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 318 (19): 1903-1912, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Akopov AL, Egorov VI, Varlamov VV, et al.: Thoracoscopic collagen pleurodesis in the treatment of malignant pleural effusions. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 28 (5): 750-3, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Gravelyn TR, Michelson MK, Gross BH, et al.: Tetracycline pleurodesis for malignant pleural effusions. A 10-year retrospective study. Cancer 59 (11): 1973-7, 1987. [PUBMED Abstract] Markman M, Cleary S, King ME, et al.: Cisplatin and cytarabine administered intrapleurally as treatment of malignant pleural effusions. Med Pediatr Oncol 13 (4): 191-3, 1985. [PUBMED Abstract] Heffner JE, Standerfer RJ, Torstveit J, et al.: Clinical efficacy of doxycycline for pleurodesis. Chest 105 (6): 1743-7, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Holoye PY, Jeffries DG, Dhingra HM, et al.: Intrapleural etoposide for malignant effusion. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 26 (2): 147-50, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Ostrowski MJ, Priestman TJ, Houston RF, et al.: A randomized trial of intracavitary bleomycin and Corynebacterium parvum in the control of malignant pleural effusions. Radiother Oncol 14 (1): 19-26, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Martínez-Moragón E, Aparicio J, Rogado MC, et al.: Pleurodesis in malignant pleural effusions: a randomized study of tetracycline versus bleomycin. Eur Respir J 10 (10): 2380-3, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Emad A, Rezaian GR: Treatment of malignant pleural effusions with a combination of bleomycin and tetracycline. A comparison of bleomycin or tetracycline alone versus a combination of bleomycin and tetracycline. Cancer 78 (12): 2498-501, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Zimmer PW, Hill M, Casey K, et al.: Prospective randomized trial of talc slurry vs bleomycin in pleurodesis for symptomatic malignant pleural effusions. Chest 112 (2): 430-4, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Patz EF, McAdams HP, Erasmus JJ, et al.: Sclerotherapy for malignant pleural effusions: a prospective randomized trial of bleomycin vs doxycycline with small-bore catheter drainage. Chest 113 (5): 1305-11, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Yim AP, Chan AT, Lee TW, et al.: Thoracoscopic talc insufflation versus talc slurry for symptomatic malignant pleural effusion. Ann Thorac Surg 62 (6): 1655-8, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Nio Y, Nagami H, Tamura K, et al.: Multi-institutional randomized clinical study on the comparative effects of intracavital chemotherapy alone versus immunotherapy alone versus immunochemotherapy for malignant effusion. Br J Cancer 80 (5-6): 775-85, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Noppen M, Degreve J, Mignolet M, et al.: A prospective, randomised study comparing the efficacy of talc slurry and bleomycin in the treatment of malignant pleural effusions. Acta Clin Belg 52 (5): 258-62, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Walker-Renard PB, Vaughan LM, Sahn SA: Chemical pleurodesis for malignant pleural effusions. Ann Intern Med 120 (1): 56-64, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Kuzdzał J, Sładek K, Wasowski D, et al.: Talc powder vs doxycycline in the control of malignant pleural effusion: a prospective, randomized trial. Med Sci Monit 9 (6): PI54-9, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Hsu LH, Soong TC, Feng AC, et al.: Intrapleural urokinase for the treatment of loculated malignant pleural effusions and trapped lungs in medically inoperable cancer patients. J Thorac Oncol 1 (5): 460-7, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Incidence and Prevalence Pathophysiology Diagnosis Treatment Current Clinical Trials Malignant pericardial effusions occur in up to 21% of cancer patients [1-3]    and  are frequently not suspected until clinical signs or symptoms of pericardial tamponade develop.[4]     Two-thirds of patients have subclinical pericardial effusions with no overt cardiovascular signs or symptoms.[5,6]   One-half of cases of pericardial effusion initially present with symptoms of cardiac tamponade.[7]   In 50% of cases, pericardial effusion is the first sign of malignant disease.[8]   Symptoms of pericardial effusion are often attributed to the underlying cancer. Initial symptoms may be the following:[9] Dyspnea. Fatigue. Asthenia. Symptomatic pericardial effusions are often a preterminal event; however, significant symptom palliation can be achieved by prompt diagnosis and management. Of patients with malignant pericardial effusions, 50% will have concomitant pleural effusions, and one-third will have pulmonary parenchymal disease.[4] One-third of patients with pericardial metastases will eventually die from pericardial tamponade.[4]   Pericardial involvement contributed to the cause of death in 85% of patients in a series reported in 1962 but in only 46% of patients in a recent study.[10]  Improvements in diagnostic and therapeutic options account for the decrease in mortality over the past 40 years. Malignant pericardial effusion occurs in up to 21% of autopsy cases in patients with common malignancies.[4,7]   Of patients with lung cancer, 33% have pericardial metastases at autopsy, and one-third of cases of pericardial metastases are caused by lung cancer. Breast cancer causes 25% of pericardial effusions, and about 25% of patients with breast cancer have pericardial effusion. Hematological malignancies (leukemia, Hodgkin disease, non-Hodgkin lymphoma) cause 15% of cases of malignant pericardial effusions.[11] A retrospective review of 23,592 effusions over a 24-year period revealed 65 malignant effusions (17%) out of 375 pericardial effusions.  Lung cancer was the most common cancer found among the malignant pericardial effusions in males, and breast cancer was the most common in females. In 43% of cases,   pericardial effusion was the first detected sign of cancer.   Of patients diagnosed with malignant pericardial effusions, 86% died within 1 year of diagnosis, with nearly one-third dying within the first month.[8] In a study of 31 patients with both cancer and pericardial effusions, malignant pericardial effusion accounted for 58% of the effusions, 32% were caused by benign idiopathic pericarditis, and radiation pericarditis caused 10% of cases.[11,12] Malignant involvement of the pericardium is the most common reason for development of pericardial effusions, which result from blockage of venous and lymphatic circulation of pericardial fluid.  Such blockage may be caused by primary malignancy of the pericardium, as with pericardial mesothelioma, or by tumors arising in the myocardium, including angiosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and malignant fibrous histiocytosis. Malignancies can also involve the pericardium through direct extension from carcinomas of the lung or esophagus, thymoma, or lymphoma.[9]   Lymphatic or hematogenous metastasis to the pericardium occurs most commonly with the following cancers: Carcinomas of the breast and lung. Leukemia. Lymphoma. Melanoma. Primary tumors of the pleura or pericardium have been termed primary intrathoracic malignant effusions.[13] Nonmalignant causes of pericardial effusion include:[14-16] Pericarditis. Myocardial infarction. Uremia. Hypothyroidism. Systemic lupus erythematosus. Trauma. Postsurgical pericardiotomy syndrome. Intrapericardial hematomas. AIDS may also cause pericardial effusion with pericarditis.[17]   Radiation therapy or chemotherapy drugs can cause pericarditis without metastatic involvement of the pericardium.  Radiation pericarditis is usually associated with radiation doses to the cardiac window exceeding 30 Gy [10] and occurs most frequently in patients who have received mediastinal radiation for Hodgkin disease or breast cancer.[10]   Doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide have been associated with the development of acute pericarditis with effusions.[11,12]   Other drugs that may cause acute pericarditis include procainamide, hydralazine, isoniazid, methysergide, phenytoin, and anticoagulants. Pericardial tamponade results from progressive fluid accumulation in the pericardial sac, causing the following:[15] Elevated intrapericardial pressure. Diminished stroke volume. Decreased cardiac output. Progressive decrease in cardiac diastolic filling. Hemodynamic compromise resulting in death if not treated. Hemodynamic compromise occurs when the normal amount of pericardial fluid (approximately 15–50 cc) increases to 200 cc to 1,800 cc.[15,18]   When fluid accumulates rapidly, as little as 250 cc of fluid can result in tamponade.[11,19] Dyspnea occurs in 93% of patients with pericardial effusions.[6] The following are common symptoms: Cough. Chest pain. Orthopnea (discomfort with breathing while lying flat). Other symptoms of pericardial effusion include: Upper abdominal distention or pressure caused by downward hepatic distention. Hiccups resulting from pressure on the diaphragm. Pleuritic pain caused by stretching of the pericardium (especially when lying flat). Signs of effusion include the following: Kussmaul’s sign (increased distention of jugular veins with inspiration). Friedreich's sign (rapid diastolic descent of the venous pulse). Pulsus paradoxus (decrease of more than 10 mm Hg in the diastolic pressure on inspiration). Pericardial friction rubs and fever are more commonly associated with nonmalignant causes of pericardial effusions than with malignant etiologies.[9] Signs of pericardial tamponade include: Tachycardia. Pulsus paradoxus. Elevated jugular venous pressure. Hypotension. However, some patients may develop tamponade without this clinical pattern.[4] A chest x-ray may show widening of the cardiac silhouette [7] if the amount of pericardial fluid collection exceeds 250 cc;[20]   however, a chest x-ray cannot determine the degree of cardiac dysfunction or tamponade. Loculated pericardial effusions may not be apparent on standard posterior/anterior or lateral chest radiographic views.[15] Transthoracic echocardiography using apical, subxiphoid, and parasternal views can evaluate the presence, quantity, and quality of suspected pericardial effusions as well as associated pericardial masses and inflammation. Moderate effusions on echocardiography show an echo-free space of 10 mm to 20 mm during diastole in M-mode or 2-dimensional echocardiography, whereas severe effusions have an echo-free space exceeding 20 mm.[21,22]   Echocardiography can also determine right and left ventricular function and the possibility of right ventricular or atrial diastolic collapse.[7]  Left ventricular collapse caused by large pleural effusion without clinically significant pericardial effusions has been reported;[4,16,23,24] however, transesophageal echocardiography may be useful for loculated effusions resulting from adhesions adjacent to the atria, where the thinness of the atrial wall may not be well visualized on transthoracic echocardiography.[4,16] Echocardiography in pericardial effusion with tamponade shows right atrial or right ventricular compression, or left atrial compression, decreased left ventricular dimension, and absence of collapse of the inferior vena cava on deep inspiration.[6,25]  Echocardiography findings predictive of pericardial tamponade have been reported.[26]  Right atrial collapse has a sensitivity of 55% to 60% and a specificity of 50% to 68%.  Right ventricular diastolic collapse has a lower sensitivity of 38% to 48% but a higher specificity ranging from 84% to 100%.  Because neither finding provides 100% sensitivity and specificity, patients who are clinically symptomatic should have a diagnostic pericardiocentesis, even in the absence of definitive findings on echocardiography.[4,27]  One study found right atrial collapse present in only 42% of patients and right ventricular collapse in 62%.[27]   Nonetheless, 80% of patients with malignant pericardial effusions had symptomatic relief following pericardiocentesis. The most definitive test for the diagnosis of cardiac tamponade is equalization of diastolic pressures between all cardiac chambers on right-heart cardiac catheterization.[7]  This invasive technique, however,  is not necessary to diagnose tamponade. Electrocardiograms in patients with pericardial effusions typically show diminished QRS amplitude in all leads. A classic but uncommonly seen finding in large effusions with pericardial tamponade is variation in the amplitude of the P wave and QRS complex in successive beats on EKG, referred to as electrical alternans. This finding results from movement of the heart within the pericardial sac.[6]  Electrocardiography is not sufficiently sensitive to diagnose pericardial effusions. Pericardial fluid cytology has an accuracy of 80% to 90% in diagnosing malignant pericardial effusion.[6,28]  Lymphomas and mesothelioma have higher false-negative detection rates on cytology evaluation.[6,29]   Pericardial fluid cytology has a specificity of up to 100%, but sensitivity ranges from 57% to 100% [10][Level of evidence: II] in patients with a known cancer diagnosis and pericardial fluid.  Because nonmalignant causes of pericardial effusion can occur in 42% to 62% of patients with cancer and pericardial fluid, a negative cytology examination of pericardial fluid does not help distinguish malignant from nonmalignant causes. The use of more than one cytological preparation (such as concentrating the sample via cytospin, using special markers, or analyzing DNA content) increases the yield over a single preparation; however, multiple samples using the same technique did not significantly increase the diagnostic yield in a retrospective study of 215 patients.[30]   In a survey of 80 samples, measurement of DNA index via flow cytometry of pericardial fluid has a sensitivity of 94.8% and a specificity of 100%, compared with routine cytology with a sensitivity of 98.5% and a specificity of 92.3%.[31][Level of evidence: II] Pericardial biopsy may increase the sensitivity of diagnosing pericardial effusions of malignant origin.  However, because pericardial effusions usually occur in advanced disease and portend a shorter survival than do other sites of metastatic involvement,  the relief of symptoms rather than diagnosis should be the overriding factor in determining the extent of the evaluation and the course of treatment.  Two studies failed to show a difference in survival in cancer patients with pericardial effusion dependent on the results of fluid cytology.[10,32] In a study of patients with stage I esophageal cancer who underwent radiation and chemotherapy, risk factors for developing pericardial effusion included advanced age, higher pericardial volume 30 (≥41.6 percentage of cardiac volume receiving more than 30 Gy), high body mass index,  and  diabetes mellitus.[33] No large controlled, randomized, prospective clinical trials demonstrate the optimal management of malignant pericardial effusions or tamponade. Treatment should therefore be individualized to maximize symptom relief with minimal impact on quality of life. Treatment options include the following:[34][Level of evidence: III] Percutaneous pericardiocentesis. Percutaneous balloon pericardiotomy. Pericardial sclerosis. Subxiphoid pericardial window. Pericardiectomy. Pericardiotomy by thoracotomy or video-assisted thoracoscopy. Considerations in the choice of therapeutic option should include:[34][Level of evidence: III] Relief of tamponade. Minimal invasiveness. Cost. Morbidity. Safety. Shortened hospitalization for patients with advanced disease. The patient's prognosis. Large, symptomatic, malignant pericardial effusions are managed by draining the fluid, unless the goals of therapy dictate a less invasive, conservative approach with concomitant shorter survival that should be balanced against quality-of-life concerns.  If treatment is indicated for management of tamponade, percutaneous subxiphoid pericardiocentesis is the treatment of choice in the acute setting.  Echocardiography is recommended for catheter guidance.[6,35]  Catheter drainage is recommended for large effusions to prevent rapid reaccumulation of fluid and subsequent tamponade and for the anticipated survival of the patient. Recurrent pericardial effusion occurs in 21% [36]  to 50% [34,35] of patients following pericardiocentesis.  Limited case series suggest rates of pericardial fluid reaccumulation at 30 days ranging from 5% to 33% after pericardial drainage followed by intrapericardial treatment with sclerosing agents or phosphorus-colloid versus more than 50% of those treated with pericardial drainage alone.[34,35] Prolonged catheter drainage can be effective in preventing fluid reaccumulation; however, the mechanism is unclear. One series had a reported recurrence in 30% of patients at a median time of 39 days.  In another series, the reported recurrence rate of the pericardial effusion was 13% by 1 year of follow-up.[37,38] The prolonged catheter drainage could be left in for several days.[38,39]  The catheter should be left in situ until the drainage is minimal (<25–50 mL in a 24-hour period) to none. It is noted that in one series of 171 patients with malignant pericardial effusion who  received echocardiography-guided pericardiocentesis followed by extended catheter drainage, the average time to very little catheter output (<50 mL in 24 hours) was about 3 days.[39] Other treatment options to prevent reaccumulation include intrapericardial sclerosis to obliterate the space within the pericardial sac, or pericardiotomy to increase the quantity of fluid drained from the pericardium. The most effective sclerosing agent for malignant pericardial effusions had been tetracycline, with success rates of up to 80%;[6] however, this agent is no longer available as an intravenous drug in the United States. Alternative sclerosants that have been used include the following: Doxycycline.[40] Bleomycin, thiotepa.[35];[41][Level of evidence: II] Carboplatin.[42][Level of evidence: II] Mitoxantrone.[43] Docetaxel. Chromic phosphate P 32. Most cases may require three or more treatments to achieve adequate sclerosis.[6] Significant pain is reported by 16% of patients undergoing pericardial sclerosis.[6] Consideration must be given to the side effects of various sclerosing agents (e.g., chest pain and arrhythmias).  Of patients undergoing pericardial sclerotherapy, 70% to 80% have no fluid reaccumulation within 30 days of the procedure.[35] A retrospective comparison of pericardiocentesis with sclerotherapy to open surgical drainage among 60 patients showed similar rates for treatment complications, incidence of recurrent effusion, and survival following treatment in both treatment groups.[44]   A retrospective review of 59 patients also found similar success rates, whether patients were managed with surgical subxiphoid pericardial window or by pericardiocentesis with or without sclerosis.[34]  Patients who underwent pericardiocentesis followed by pericardial window had the longest survival, with a median of 6 months; however, selection bias toward patients with better performance status undergoing more aggressive surgical techniques may contribute to the reported survival advantage.  The surgical procedure group had significantly higher average costs of $4,830 compared with $1,625 for patients managed with pericardiocentesis.[34] Other studies have reported mortality, recurrence, and survival rates for sclerosis that are similar to or slightly lower than those for subxiphoid window or video-assisted thoracoscopy.[44,45];[46][Level of evidence: II][34][Level of evidence: III]  Pericardiocentesis with or without sclerotherapy should be considered instead of more invasive procedures in patients with advanced disease or poor functional status.[47] Transcutaneous balloon pericardiostomy is another technique that is less invasive than open surgical approaches, which include subxiphoid pericardial windows, thoracotomy with pericardiopleural window formation,[48] and thoracotomy with pericardectomy. Video pericardioscopy has a diagnostic sensitivity of 97% for detecting malignant effusions.[49]   Pericardioscopy also is useful for drainage of loculated effusions.[50][Level of evidence: II] Video-assisted thoracoscopy is preferable to more invasive surgical management and should be considered for patients requiring repeated pericardiocentesis for control of symptomatic effusions.[47] Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Lam KY, Dickens P, Chan AC: Tumors of the heart. A 20-year experience with a review of 12,485 consecutive autopsies. Arch Pathol Lab Med 117 (10): 1027-31, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Silvestri F, Bussani R, Pavletic N, et al.: Metastases of the heart and pericardium. G Ital Cardiol 27 (12): 1252-5, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Galli M, Politi A, Jemoli R, et al.: Transcatheter management of cardiac and pericardial metastatic involvement. G Ital Cardiol 28 (6): 687-90, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Shepherd FA: Malignant pericardial effusion. Curr Opin Oncol 9 (2): 170-4, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Bisel HF, Wroblewski F, Ladue JS: Incidence and clinical manifestations of cardiac metastases. J Am Med Assoc 153 (8): 712-5, 1953. [PUBMED Abstract] Fiocco M, Krasna MJ: The management of malignant pleural and pericardial effusions. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 11 (2): 253-65, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] DeCamp MM, Mentzer SJ, Swanson SJ, et al.: Malignant effusive disease of the pleura and pericardium. Chest 112 (4 Suppl): 291S-295S, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] García-Riego A, Cuiñas C, Vilanova JJ: Malignant pericardial effusion. Acta Cytol 45 (4): 561-6, 2001 Jul-Aug. [PUBMED Abstract] Warren WH: Malignancies involving the pericardium. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 12 (2): 119-29, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Wang PC, Yang KY, Chao JY, et al.: Prognostic role of pericardial fluid cytology in cardiac tamponade associated with non-small cell lung cancer. Chest 118 (3): 744-9, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Chiles C, Woodard PK, Gutierrez FR, et al.: Metastatic involvement of the heart and pericardium: CT and MR imaging. Radiographics 21 (2): 439-49, 2001 Mar-Apr. [PUBMED Abstract] Posner MR, Cohen GI, Skarin AT: Pericardial disease in patients with cancer. The differentiation of malignant from idiopathic and radiation-induced pericarditis. Am J Med 71 (3): 407-13, 1981. [PUBMED Abstract] Ang P, Tan EH, Leong SS, et al.: Primary intrathoracic malignant effusion: a descriptive study. Chest 120 (1): 50-4, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Guberman BA, Fowler NO, Engel PJ, et al.: Cardiac tamponade in medical patients. Circulation 64 (3): 633-40, 1981. [PUBMED Abstract] Beauchamp KA: Pericardial tamponade: an oncologic emergency. Clin J Oncol Nurs 2 (3): 85-95, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] D'Cruz IA, Kanuru N: Echocardiography of serous effusions adjacent to the heart. Echocardiography 18 (5): 445-56, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] White CS: MR evaluation of the pericardium and cardiac malignancies. Magn Reson Imaging Clin N Am 4 (2): 237-51, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Celermajer DS, Boyer MJ, Bailey BP, et al.: Pericardiocentesis for symptomatic malignant pericardial effusion: a study of 36 patients. Med J Aust 154 (1): 19-22, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Hancock EW: Neoplastic pericardial disease. Cardiol Clin 8 (4): 673-82, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Mercé J, Sagristà-Sauleda J, Permanyer-Miralda G, et al.: Correlation between clinical and Doppler echocardiographic findings in patients with moderate and large pericardial effusion: implications for the diagnosis of cardiac tamponade. Am Heart J 138 (4 Pt 1): 759-64, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Weitzman LB, Tinker WP, Kronzon I, et al.: The incidence and natural history of pericardial effusion after cardiac surgery--an echocardiographic study. Circulation 69 (3): 506-11, 1984. [PUBMED Abstract] Sagristà-Sauleda J, Mercé J, Permanyer-Miralda G, et al.: Clinical clues to the causes of large pericardial effusions. Am J Med 109 (2): 95-101, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Kisanuki A, Shono H, Kiyonaga K, et al.: Two-dimensional echocardiographic demonstration of left ventricular diastolic collapse due to compression by pleural effusion. Am Heart J 122 (4 Pt 1): 1173-5, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Kaplan LM, Epstein SK, Schwartz SL, et al.: Clinical, echocardiographic, and hemodynamic evidence of cardiac tamponade caused by large pleural effusions. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 151 (3 Pt 1): 904-8, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Himelman RB, Kircher B, Rockey DC, et al.: Inferior vena cava plethora with blunted respiratory response: a sensitive echocardiographic sign of cardiac tamponade. J Am Coll Cardiol 12 (6): 1470-7, 1988. [PUBMED Abstract] Chong HH, Plotnick GD: Pericardial effusion and tamponade: evaluation, imaging modalities, and management. Compr Ther 21 (7): 378-85, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Cooper JP, Oliver RM, Currie P, et al.: How do the clinical findings in patients with pericardial effusions influence the success of aspiration? Br Heart J 73 (4): 351-4, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Meyers DG, Meyers RE, Prendergast TW: The usefulness of diagnostic tests on pericardial fluid. Chest 111 (5): 1213-21, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Thurber DL, Edwards JE, Achor RW: Secondary malignant tumors of the pericardium. Circulation 26: 228-41, 1962. [PUBMED Abstract] Garcia LW, Ducatman BS, Wang HH: The value of multiple fluid specimens in the cytological diagnosis of malignancy. Mod Pathol 7 (6): 665-8, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Decker D, Stratmann H, Springer W, et al.: Benign and malignant cells in effusions: diagnostic value of image DNA cytometry in comparison to cytological analysis. Pathol Res Pract 194 (11): 791-5, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Okamoto H, Shinkai T, Yamakido M, et al.: Cardiac tamponade caused by primary lung cancer and the management of pericardial effusion. Cancer 71 (1): 93-8, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Tamari K, Isohashi F, Akino Y, et al.: Risk factors for pericardial effusion in patients with stage I esophageal cancer treated with chemoradiotherapy. Anticancer Res 34 (12): 7389-93, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Anderson TM, Ray CW, Nwogu CE, et al.: Pericardial catheter sclerosis versus surgical procedures for pericardial effusions in cancer patients. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino) 42 (3): 415-9, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Martinoni A, Cipolla CM, Civelli M, et al.: Intrapericardial treatment of neoplastic pericardial effusions. Herz 25 (8): 787-93, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Tsang TS, Seward JB, Barnes ME, et al.: Outcomes of primary and secondary treatment of pericardial effusion in patients with malignancy. Mayo Clin Proc 75 (3): 248-53, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Allen KB, Faber LP, Warren WH, et al.: Pericardial effusion: subxiphoid pericardiostomy versus percutaneous catheter drainage. Ann Thorac Surg 67 (2): 437-40, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Patel N, Rafique AM, Eshaghian S, et al.: Retrospective comparison of outcomes, diagnostic value, and complications of percutaneous prolonged drainage versus surgical pericardiotomy of pericardial effusion associated with malignancy. Am J Cardiol 112 (8): 1235-9, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Lekhakul A, Assawakawintip C, Fenstad ER, et al.: Safety and Outcome of Percutaneous Drainage of Pericardial Effusions in Patients with Cancer. Am J Cardiol 122 (6): 1091-1094, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Vaitkus PT, Herrmann HC, LeWinter MM: Treatment of malignant pericardial effusion. JAMA 272 (1): 59-64, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Colleoni M, Martinelli G, Beretta F, et al.: Intracavitary chemotherapy with thiotepa in malignant pericardial effusions: an active and well-tolerated regimen. J Clin Oncol 16 (7): 2371-6, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Moriya T, Takiguchi Y, Tabeta H, et al.: Controlling malignant pericardial effusion by intrapericardial carboplatin administration in patients with primary non-small-cell lung cancer. Br J Cancer 83 (7): 858-62, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Norum J, Lunde P, Aasebø U, et al.: Mitoxantrone in malignant pericardial effusion. J Chemother 10 (5): 399-404, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Girardi LN, Ginsberg RJ, Burt ME: Pericardiocentesis and intrapericardial sclerosis: effective therapy for malignant pericardial effusions. Ann Thorac Surg 64 (5): 1422-7; discussion 1427-8, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Maher EA, Shepherd FA, Todd TJ: Pericardial sclerosis as the primary management of malignant pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 112 (3): 637-43, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Liu G, Crump M, Goss PE, et al.: Prospective comparison of the sclerosing agents doxycycline and bleomycin for the primary management of malignant pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade. J Clin Oncol 14 (12): 3141-7, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Lin JC, Hazelrigg SR, Landreneau RJ: Video-assisted thoracic surgery for diseases within the mediastinum. Surg Clin North Am 80 (5): 1511-33, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Olson JE, Ryan MB, Blumenstock DA: Eleven years' experience with pericardial-peritoneal window in the management of malignant and benign pericardial effusions. Ann Surg Oncol 2 (2): 165-9, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Porte HL, Janecki-Delebecq TJ, Finzi L, et al.: Pericardoscopy for primary management of pericardial effusion in cancer patients. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 16 (3): 287-91, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Millaire A, Wurtz A, de Groote P, et al.: Malignant pericardial effusions: usefulness of pericardioscopy. Am Heart J 124 (4): 1030-4, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Overview Etiology and Physiology Assessment and Diagnosis Treatment OptionsMedical managementRadiation therapyChemotherapyThrombolysisStent placementSurgery Psychosocial Considerations Pediatric Considerations Medical management Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Thrombolysis Stent placement Surgery Superior vena cava syndrome (SVCS) is an array of symptoms caused by the
impairment of blood flow through the superior vena cava (SVC) to the right
atrium.  Symptoms that prompt suspicion of this syndrome include the following:[1] Dyspnea. Coughing. Swelling of the face, neck, upper trunk, and extremities. In rare
instances, patients may complain of hoarseness, chest pain, dysphagia, and
hemoptysis. Physical signs that may be noted on presentation are the following: Neck vein
distention. Thoracic vein distention. Edema of the face or upper extremities. Plethora. Tachypnea. Rarely, cyanosis, Horner syndrome, and a paralyzed
vocal cord may also be present.[1] SVCS is usually a sign of locally advanced bronchogenic carcinoma.  Survival
depends on the status of the patient’s disease.  When small cell bronchogenic
carcinoma is treated with chemotherapy, the median survival times with or
without SVCS are almost identical (42 weeks or 40 weeks, respectively).  The 24-month
survival rate is 9% in patients without SVCS and 3% in those with the syndrome. 
When the malignancy is treated with radiation therapy, 46% of patients who have
non-small cell lung cancer experience relief of symptoms compared with 62% of
patients who have small cell bronchogenic carcinoma.  The 2-year survival rate of 5%
is almost the same for both groups.[2] Most non-Hodgkin lymphoma patients with SVCS respond to appropriate
chemotherapy or to combined modality regimens. Since SVCS was first described by William Hunter
in 1757, the spectrum of underlying conditions associated with it has shifted
from tuberculosis and syphilitic aneurysms of the ascending aorta to malignant
disorders.  Almost 95% of SVCS cases described in published modern series result from cancer; the most common cause is small cell bronchogenic carcinoma,
followed by squamous cell carcinoma of the lung, adenocarcinoma of the lung,
non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and large cell carcinoma of the lung.[3]  A
nonmalignant cause of SVCS in cancer patients is thrombosis that is associated
with intracaval catheters or pacemaker wires.[4] A rare cause of SVCS is
fibrosing mediastinitis, either idiopathic or associated with
histoplasmosis.[5] Additional rare causes of SVCS include metastatic germ cell
neoplasms, metastatic breast cancer, colon cancer, Kaposi sarcoma, esophageal
carcinoma, fibrous mesothelioma, Behçet syndrome, thymoma, substernal thyroid
goiter, Hodgkin lymphoma, and sarcoidosis.[6] Knowledge of the anatomy of the SVC and its relationship
to the surrounding lymph nodes is essential to understanding the development of
the syndrome.  The SVC is formed by the junction of the left and right
brachiocephalic veins in the mid third of the mediastinum.  The SVC extends
caudally for 6 to 8 cm, coursing anterior to the right mainstem bronchus and terminating in the superior right atrium, and extends
anteriorly to the right mainstem bronchus.  The SVC is joined posteriorly by
the azygos vein as it loops over the right mainstem bronchus and lies posterior
to and to the right of the ascending aorta.  The mediastinal parietal pleura is
lateral to the SVC, creating a confined space, and the SVC is adjacent to the
right paratracheal, azygous, right hilar, and subcarinal lymph node groups. 
The vessel itself is thin-walled, and the blood flowing therein is under low
pressure.  Thus, when the nodes or ascending aorta enlarge, the SVC is
compressed, blood flow slows, and complete occlusion may occur. The severity of the syndrome depends on the rapidity of onset of the
obstruction and its location.  The more rapid the onset, the more severe the
symptoms because the collateral veins do not have time to distend to
accommodate an increased blood flow.[7] If the obstruction is above the entry of
the azygos vein, the syndrome is less pronounced because the azygous venous
system can readily distend to accommodate the shunted blood with less venous
pressure developing in the head, arms, and upper thorax. If the obstruction is
below the entry of the azygos vein, more florid symptoms and signs are seen
because the blood must be returned to the heart via the upper abdominal veins
and the inferior vena cava, which requires higher venous pressure. One study suggested that the general recruitment of venous collaterals over
time may lead to remission of the syndrome, although the SVC remains
obstructed.[8] Once SVCS is recognized, prompt clinical
attention is important.  For the following reasons, a diagnosis should be established before 
therapy is initiated:[3] 75% of patients have symptoms and signs for longer than 1 week before
seeking medical attention. Cancer patients diagnosed with SVCS do not die of the syndrome
itself but rather from the extent of their underlying disease. 3% to 5% of the patients diagnosed with SVCS do not have cancer. In the absence of tracheal obstruction, SVCS is unlikely to be a life-threatening oncologic emergency, and treatment prior to definitive diagnosis is
not justified. The initial evaluation of the patient should include a chest x-ray to look
for mediastinal masses and associated findings, such as pleural effusion, lobar
collapse, or cardiomegaly.  Computed tomography (CT) scanning of the thorax
yields the most useful diagnostic information and can define the anatomy of the
involved mediastinal nodes.  Venous patency and the presence of thrombi are
assessed by using contrast and rapid scanning techniques.[9] Depending on
local expertise, contrast or nuclear venography, magnetic resonance imaging,
and ultrasound may be valuable in assessing the site and nature of the
obstruction. If bronchogenic carcinoma is suspected, a sputum specimen should be obtained. 
If the sputum specimen is negative, a biopsy specimen should be taken from the
most accessible site that is clinically involved with disease.  The biopsy
approach depends on the working diagnosis, the location of the tumor, the
physiologic status of the patient, and the expertise available at the facility. 
It may include:[10] Bronchoscopy. Biopsy of palpable cervical or supraclavicular
lymph nodes. Needle biopsy of a lung mass or mediastinal nodes using either CT
or ultrasound guidance. Mediastinoscopy. Mediastinotomy. Median sternotomy. Video-assisted thoracoscopy. Conventional thoracotomy. The biopsy
findings will help the clinician plan appropriate treatment. The treatment of SVCS depends on the following: The etiology of
the obstruction. The severity of the symptoms. The prognosis of the patient. Patient preferences and goals for therapy. Radiation therapy or
chemotherapy should be withheld until the etiology of the obstruction is clear. 
The treatments discussed here focus on SVC
obstruction caused by a malignant tumor.  Because the treatment of malignant
obstruction may depend on tumor histology, a histologic diagnosis—if not made
earlier—should be made before treatment is initiated.  Unless there is
airway obstruction or cerebral edema, there appears to be no detriment in
outcome when treatment is delayed for the assessment.[1,11-15]  The following
treatment approaches can be used for SVCS. A patient with sufficient collateral blood flow and minimal symptoms may not
need treatment.  If the lesion is above the azygous vein or if the onset of SVC
occlusion is slow enough to allow sufficient collateral circulation, the
symptoms and signs may stabilize, and the patient may be comfortable enough to
forego further therapy.  Short-term palliation of a symptomatic patient who
does not want aggressive treatment may be achieved by elevating the head and
using corticosteroids and diuresis. There are no definitive studies that prove the
effectiveness of steroids,  although steroids are potentially useful to treat
respiratory compromise.  Diuretics may give symptomatic relief of edema but
can ultimately cause systemic complications, such as dehydration.[9,16] If the obstruction of the SVC is caused by a tumor that is not
sensitive to chemotherapy, radiation therapy should be given.  Treatment with
larger fractions of radiation is thought to be beneficial in developing a rapid
response.  One study shows, however, that there is no obvious need for large
radiation fraction sizes for the first few radiation treatments as was
previously believed.[17] Many fractionation schemes have been used, with doses
ranging from 30 Gy in 10 fractions to 50 Gy in 25 fractions.  Relief of
symptoms in small cell lung cancer is reported to be 62% to 80%, whereas in non-small cell lung cancer, approximately 46% of the patients experienced
symptomatic relief.[2,18]  In one study, more than 90% of the patients
achieved a partial or complete response with a 3-week regimen of 8 Gy given
once a week for a total dose of 24 Gy.[19] Chemotherapy is the treatment of choice for sensitive tumors such as lymphoma
or small cell lung cancer.  SVCS does not appear to be an independent
prognostic factor, and its presence should not change the treatment
approach.  Rapid initiation of chemotherapy can result in complete and partial
response rates of the SVCS of more than 80% in small cell lung cancer
patients.[2,18] It has been suggested that SVCS arises when a thrombus forms in a partially
occluded vein.  In patients with a documented thrombus in the SVC, treatment
may include thrombectomy, with or without tissue plasminogen activator or
other thrombolytic agents such as streptokinase or urokinase.[1] There have been numerous small studies using an intravascular expandable stent
to reopen the occluded SVC; however, no prospectively designed comparative
studies have been published.[20] The reported response rates have been about
90% or greater.[21][Level of evidence: II]  There is no agreement on the need for anticoagulant
therapy after stent placement.  In one series that used anticoagulant therapy
for patients as part of the treatment protocol, there were reports of
reocclusion after this therapy was stopped.[22][Level of evidence: II] However, in another study, 17
cancer patients who were treated with stents and who did not have anticoagulant
therapy had no occlusions.[23][Level of evidence: II] Surgical bypass of an obstructed SVC is more appropriate for patients with a
benign obstruction than with a malignant obstruction,[24] although surgical
bypass has also been used for patients with malignant obstructions. Patients and family members are often frightened and anxious because of the
symptoms produced by SVCS, particularly swelling,
dysphagia, coughing, and hoarseness.  Information about the cause of the symptoms and about short-term
measures for palliation is needed by patients and family members, especially during the diagnostic period.  When
aggressive treatment is declined because of the terminal nature of the
underlying disease, symptom management approaches
 may need to be taught to patients and family members. Because most adult patients who develop SVCS have lung cancer, the treatment
and psychologic support approaches that are developed for SVCS should take into
account the patient’s prognosis and psychologic condition, goals of care, and other symptoms
caused by the malignancy.[25] As described in other sections of this summary, SVCS refers to the symptoms associated with the compression or obstruction of
the SVC; the compression of the trachea is termed superior
mediastinal syndrome (SMS).  Because SMS and the resulting respiratory
compromise frequently occur in children with SVCS, the two syndromes have
become almost synonymous in pediatric practice.[26,27]  In adults, the trachea
and the right mainstem bronchus are relatively rigid structures compared with
the vena cava, but in children these structures are more susceptible to
compression.  In addition, the relatively smaller intraluminal diameters of a
child’s trachea and bronchus can tolerate little edema before respiratory
symptoms occur.  Because of this accompanying respiratory component, SVCS in
children differs from the adult syndrome and constitutes a serious medical
emergency. The most common symptoms of SVCS in children are similar to those in adults and
include:[26] Coughing. Hoarseness. Dyspnea. Orthopnea. Chest pain. Symptoms
that are less common but more serious are the following: Syncope. Anxiety. Confusion. Lethargy. Headache. Distorted vision. A sense of fullness in the ears. SVCS is rare in children and appears at presentation in 12% of pediatric
patients with malignant mediastinal tumors.[28,29]  The etiology, diagnosis, and
treatment of SVCS in children differs from that in adults.  Whereas the most
frequent cause of SVCS in adults is bronchogenic carcinoma,[3] in children the
most frequent malignant cause of the syndrome is non-Hodgkin lymphoma.  As in
adults, a frequent nonmalignant cause is thrombosis from catheterization for
venous access.[26] A physical examination, chest radiograph, and the medical history of the
patient are usually sufficient to establish a diagnosis of SVCS.  If lymphoma
or other malignant disease is suspected, it is desirable to obtain a tissue
sample for diagnosis.  However, the procedure to obtain the specimen may
involve significant risk and may not be clinically feasible.  Children with
SVCS have a poor tolerance for the necessary general anesthesia because the
accompanying cardiovascular and pulmonary changes aggravate the SVCS, often
making intubation impossible.  Also, extubation may be difficult or impossible,
thus requiring prolonged airway provision (intubation).  A CT
scan of the chest to determine tracheal size, upright and supine
echocardiography, and a flow volume loop may help evaluate anesthetic risk. 
Because anesthesia use is a serious risk, the diagnosis should be made with the
least invasive means possible.[30] Published reports suggest a stepwise
approach to diagnosis.[26] When a malignant mass is the cause of the SVCS, the situation may be a medical
emergency with no opportunity to establish a tissue diagnosis.  In these cases,
the most appropriate course may be to initiate empiric therapy prior to biopsy. 
The traditional empiric therapy is irradiation, with the daily dose governed by
the presumed radiosensitivity of the tumor.  After irradiation, respiratory
deterioration from the apparent tracheal swelling may occur because of the
inability of narrow lumens in children to accommodate edema and because of the
greater degree of edema at onset, which is the result of the rapid speed at which
tumors grow in children.  In these situations, a course of prednisone at 10 mg/m2 of body surface area 4 times per day may be necessary.[26] In addition to radiation, empiric therapy of SVCS has included chemotherapeutic
agents incorporating steroids, cyclophosphamide, or both in combination with an
anthracycline and vincristine.[26]  If the tumor fails to respond, it may be a
benign lesion. If surgery becomes necessary, it should be performed with the patient in the
semi-Fowler’s position, allowing the surgeon the ability to rapidly change the patient's position to lateral
or prone.  Cardiopulmonary bypass facilities and a rigid bronchoscope should be
available in a standby capacity.[30] Gauden SJ: Superior vena cava syndrome induced by bronchogenic carcinoma: is this an oncological emergency? Australas Radiol 37 (4): 363-6, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Urban T, Lebeau B, Chastang C, et al.: Superior vena cava syndrome in small-cell lung cancer. Arch Intern Med 153 (3): 384-7, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Yellin A, Rosen A, Reichert N, et al.: Superior vena cava syndrome. The myth--the facts. Am Rev Respir Dis 141 (5 Pt 1): 1114-8, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Gray BH, Olin JW, Graor RA, et al.: Safety and efficacy of thrombolytic therapy for superior vena cava syndrome. Chest 99 (1): 54-9, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Goodwin RA, Nickell JA, Des Prez RM: Mediastinal fibrosis complicating healed primary histoplasmosis and tuberculosis. Medicine (Baltimore) 51 (3): 227-46, 1972. [PUBMED Abstract] Yahalom J: Oncologic emergencies: superior vena cava syndrome. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds.: Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology. JB Lippincott Company, 4th Edition, 1993, pp 2111-2118. Netter FH: Superior vena cava syndrome. In: Netter FH: The CIBA Collection of Medical Illustrations: Respiratory System. CIBA Pharmaceutical Company, 1980, pp 164. Ahmann FR: A reassessment of the clinical implications of the superior vena caval syndrome. J Clin Oncol 2 (8): 961-9, 1984. [PUBMED Abstract] Abner A: Approach to the patient who presents with superior vena cava obstruction. Chest 103 (4 Suppl): 394S-397S, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Hsu JW, Chiang CD, Hsu WH, et al.: Superior vena cava syndrome in lung cancer: an analysis of 54 cases. Gaoxiong Yi Xue Ke Xue Za Zhi 11 (10): 568-73, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Chen JC, Bongard F, Klein SR: A contemporary perspective on superior vena cava syndrome. Am J Surg 160 (2): 207-11, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Stanford W, Doty DB: The role of venography and surgery in the management of patients with superior vena cava obstruction. Ann Thorac Surg 41 (2): 158-63, 1986. [PUBMED Abstract] Salsali M, Cliffton EE: Superior vena caval obstruction with lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 6 (5): 437-42, 1968. [PUBMED Abstract] Schraufnagel DE, Hill R, Leech JA, et al.: Superior vena caval obstruction. Is it a medical emergency? Am J Med 70 (6): 1169-74, 1981. [PUBMED Abstract] Shimm DS, Logue GL, Rigsby LC: Evaluating the superior vena cava syndrome. JAMA 245 (9): 951-3, 1981. [PUBMED Abstract] Baker GL, Barnes HJ: Superior vena cava syndrome: etiology, diagnosis, and treatment. Am J Crit Care 1 (1): 54-64, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Chan RH, Dar AR, Yu E, et al.: Superior vena cava obstruction in small-cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 38 (3): 513-20, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Würschmidt F, Bünemann H, Heilmann HP: Small cell lung cancer with and without superior vena cava syndrome: a multivariate analysis of prognostic factors in 408 cases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 33 (1): 77-82, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Rodrigues CI, Njo KH, Karim AB: Hypofractionated radiation therapy in the treatment of superior vena cava syndrome. Lung Cancer 10 (3-4): 221-8, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Tanigawa N, Sawada S, Mishima K, et al.: Clinical outcome of stenting in superior vena cava syndrome associated with malignant tumors. Comparison with conventional treatment. Acta Radiol 39 (6): 669-74, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Nicholson AA, Ettles DF, Arnold A, et al.: Treatment of malignant superior vena cava obstruction: metal stents or radiation therapy. J Vasc Interv Radiol 8 (5): 781-8, 1997 Sep-Oct. [PUBMED Abstract] Dyet JF, Nicholson AA, Cook AM: The use of the Wallstent endovascular prosthesis in the treatment of malignant obstruction of the superior vena cava. Clin Radiol 48 (6): 381-5, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Irving JD, Dondelinger RF, Reidy JF, et al.: Gianturco self-expanding stents: clinical experience in the vena cava and large veins. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 15 (5): 328-33, 1992 Sep-Oct. [PUBMED Abstract] Doty DB: Bypass of superior vena cava: Six years' experience with spiral vein graft for obstruction of superior vena cava due to benign and malignant disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 83 (3): 326-38, 1982. [PUBMED Abstract] Holland JC: Lung Cancer. In: Holland JC, Rowland JH, eds.: Handbook of Psychooncology: Psychological Care of the Patient With Cancer. Oxford University Press, 1989, pp 180-187. Lange B, O'Neill JA, D'Angio G, et al.: Oncologic emergencies. In: Pizzo PA, Poplack DG: Principles and Practice of Pediatric Oncology. 2nd ed. JB Lippincott, 1993, pp 951-972. Ingram L, Rivera GK, Shapiro DN: Superior vena cava syndrome associated with childhood malignancy: analysis of 24 cases. Med Pediatr Oncol 18 (6): 476-81, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Pokorny WJ, Sherman JO: Mediastinal masses in infants and children. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 68 (6): 869-75, 1974. [PUBMED Abstract] King RM, Telander RL, Smithson WA, et al.: Primary mediastinal tumors in children. J Pediatr Surg 17 (5): 512-20, 1982. [PUBMED Abstract] Neuman GG, Weingarten AE, Abramowitz RM, et al.: The anesthetic management of the patient with an anterior mediastinal mass. Anesthesiology 60 (2): 144-7, 1984. [PUBMED Abstract] The PDQ cancer information summaries are reviewed regularly and updated as new information becomes available.  This section describes the latest changes made to this summary as of the date above. Dyspnea in Patients With Advanced Cancer Added text about a randomized controlled trial that prospectively evaluated dexamethasone versus a placebo in ambulatory patients with dyspnea. A clinically meaningful improvement in dyspnea was seen in both groups, leading the authors to conclude that high-dose dexamethasone should not be given routinely to alleviate cancer-related dyspnea (cited Hui et al. as reference 45 and level of evidence I). This summary is written and maintained by the PDQ Supportive and Palliative Care Editorial Board, which is
editorially independent of NCI.  The summary reflects an independent review of
the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or NIH.  More
information about summary policies and the role of the PDQ Editorial Boards  in
maintaining the PDQ summaries can be found on the About This PDQ Summary and PDQ® Cancer Information for Health Professionals pages. This PDQ cancer information summary for health professionals provides comprehensive, peer-reviewed, evidence-based information about the pathophysiology and treatment of cardiopulmonary syndromes, including dyspnea, malignant pleural effusion, malignant pericardial effusion, and superior vena cava syndrome. It is intended as a resource to inform and assist clinicians in the care of their patients.  It does not provide formal guidelines or recommendations for making health care decisions. This summary is reviewed regularly and updated as necessary by the PDQ Supportive and Palliative Care Editorial Board, which is editorially independent of the National Cancer Institute (NCI).  The summary reflects an independent review of the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Board members review recently published articles each month to determine whether an article should: be discussed at a meeting, be cited with text, or replace or update an existing article that is already cited. Changes to the summaries are made through a consensus process in which Board members evaluate the strength of the evidence in  the published articles and determine how the article should be included in the summary. The lead reviewer for Cardiopulmonary Syndromes is: Megan Reimann, PharmD, BCOP (Total CME) Any comments or questions about the summary content should be submitted to Cancer.gov through the NCI website's Email Us. Do not contact the individual Board Members with questions or comments about the summaries. Board members will not respond to individual inquiries. Some of the reference citations in this summary are accompanied by a level-of-evidence designation. These designations are intended to help readers assess the strength of the evidence supporting the use of specific interventions or approaches. The PDQ Supportive and Palliative Care Editorial Board uses a formal evidence ranking system in developing its level-of-evidence designations. PDQ is a registered trademark. Although the content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text, it cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless it is presented in its entirety and is regularly updated. However, an author would be permitted to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks succinctly: [include excerpt from the summary].” The preferred citation for this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Supportive and Palliative Care Editorial Board. PDQ Cardiopulmonary Syndromes. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/cardiopulmonary-hp-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389275] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use within the PDQ summaries only. Permission to use images outside the context of PDQ information must be obtained from the owner(s) and cannot be granted by  the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the illustrations in this summary, along with many other cancer-related images, is available in Visuals Online, a collection of over 2,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used as a basis for insurance reimbursement determinations. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s Email Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Participate in MyPART - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/pediatric-adult-rare-tumor/participate
txt: Natural History Study of Rare Solid Tumors - 3rd Anniversary of Opening Enrollment The MyPART network works best when everyone works together. We need patients, families, and advocacy organizations to help us learn as much as we can about rare cancers. Learn more about how you can participate in MyPART’s work to improve the lives of children, teens, and young adults with rare cancers.  Natural History Study of Rare Solid Tumors


The purpose of a natural history study is to collect information, tissue and tumor samples, and data from patients to better understand how cancer develops and grows. When researchers don’t know how cancer grows it is much harder to design trials to test new treatments. Natural history studies help researchers understand cancer better.  Participating in a Clinical Trial for Rare Cancer


By joining a clinical trial or study, you may get access to a new drug, or a chance to see world-renowned doctors. You are also helping future rare cancer patients by helping researchers today.  The Role of Advocacy in MyPART


In the MyPART network, our mission is to engage patients as partners in rare tumor research. Advocacy groups like yours are a critical bridge between patients and researchers as you help share your experience and expertise between these groups. Non-profit organizations dedicated to improving the experiences and outcomes of people with rare solid tumors are important members of the MyPART network.  MyPART Advocacy Partners


Several patient advocacy organizations have joined the MyPART Network as partners.  The purpose of a natural history study is to collect information, tissue and tumor samples, and data from patients to better understand how cancer develops and grows. When researchers don’t know how cancer grows it is much harder to design trials to test new treatments. Natural history studies help researchers understand cancer better. By joining a clinical trial or study, you may get access to a new drug, or a chance to see world-renowned doctors. You are also helping future rare cancer patients by helping researchers today. In the MyPART network, our mission is to engage patients as partners in rare tumor research. Advocacy groups like yours are a critical bridge between patients and researchers as you help share your experience and expertise between these groups. Non-profit organizations dedicated to improving the experiences and outcomes of people with rare solid tumors are important members of the MyPART network. Several patient advocacy organizations have joined the MyPART Network as partners.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Episode 16: Voices for Equity: Conversations on Cancer Health Disparities - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/grants-training/training/inside-cancer-careers/episode-16
txt: In this episode, we hear from Dr. Brian Rivers, Director of Cancer Health Equity Institute at Morehouse School of Medicine. Dr. Rivers shares the importance of the cancer health disparities research and his journey into the field.  Then we hear from Dr. Tiffany Wallace, Program Director at NCI Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities (CRCHD) and lead for the Disparities and Equity Program (DEP). Dr. Wallace shares her career path in the field of cancer health disparities research and the programs that support it. Apple Podcasts  Spotify Podcasts   Brian Rivers, Ph.D., M.P.H. Dr. Brian Rivers is a Professor and Director of the Cancer Health Equity Institute at Morehouse School of Medicine (MSM). Dr. Rivers is nationally and internationally recognized as a leader in health disparities research and a retired member of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) National Advisory Council on Minority Health and Health Disparities (NACMHD). Dr. Rivers is an active member in the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) community and serves in several ledership capacities. Dr. Rivers is a behavioral scientist with a broad background in implementation science and public health, with specific training and expertise in methodologies commonly used to addressing health disparitiesTo date, Dr. Rivers has secured more than $30 million in extramural funding through NIH. The goal of Dr. Rivers program of research is to contribute to advancing cancer health equity.  More specifically, Dr. Rivers research portfolio has endeavored to expand the application of population-based intervention science to understand how to address cancer health disparities in clinical and community-based settings, using multi-level approaches, such as medical mobile apps and/or Community Health Workers/Patient Navigators.  Tiffany Wallace, Ph.D. Dr. Tiffany Wallace is the Lead for the Disparities and Equity Program (DEP) at the NCI within CRCHD. In this role, she coordinates and strengthens NCI’s overall cancer disparity research activities, encompassing basic, clinical, translational, and population-based research. Additionally, Dr. Wallace oversees a portfolio of grant mechanisms promoting basic/translational cancer research and develops initiatives to stimulate research in underfunded areas. Prior to joining the CRCHD, Dr. Wallace was an Oncology Scientist at Human Genome Sciences, where she managed clinically relevant research programs and conducted preclinical development of promising cancer therapeutics. Dr. Wallace received her Ph.D. in biomedical sciences from the University of Florida in Gainesville, FL. She completed her postdoctoral training in the Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis at NCI, where she conducted basic and translational research to identify biomarkers of aggressive prostate and breast cancer. Brian Rivers, Ph.D., M.P.H. Morehouse School of Medicine  Cancer Health Equity Institute Cancer Moonshot NCI's Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities(CRCHD) Partnerships to Advance Cancer Health Equity (PACHE)  Intramural Continuing Umbrella of Research Experiences (iCURE) American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) Science Education and Career Advancement Committee AACR Cancer Disparities Progress Report AACR Associate Membership Ad: Request for Information (RFI): Inviting Comments and Suggestions on the National Cancer Institute’s Support of Early Career, Mentored Cancer Researchers and Trainees Tiffany Wallace, Ph.D. NCI's Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities (CRCHD) CRCHD Disparities Research PDXNet  Specialized Programs of Research Excellence (SPOREs) Translational Research Program AACR Cancer Disparities Progress Report NCI's Equity and Inclusion Program  The Context of Poverty | Division of Cancer Control and Population Sciences (DCCPS) AACR Cancer Disparities Progress Report 
Netflix Series "Live to 100: Secrets of the Blue Zones" 
Book Recommendation: Oliver's Great Big Universe by Dr. Jorge Cham [UPBEAT MUSIC] Oliver Bogler: Hello and welcome to Inside Cancer Careers, a podcast from the National Cancer Institute. I'm your host, Oliver Bogler: I work at the NCI in the Center for Cancer Training. On Inside Cancer Careers, we explore all the different ways people fight cancer and hear their stories. Today, we're talking to Dr. Brian Rivers of Morehouse School of Medicine, and after the break, Dr. Tiffany Wallace of the NCI. Listen through to the end of the show to hear our guests make some interesting recommendations and where we invite you to take Your turn. One of the goals of the National Cancer Plan is to eliminate inequities by eliminating disparities in cancer risk factors, incidence, treatment side effects, and mortality by providing equitable access to prevention screening, treatment, and survivorship care. On this episode of Inside Cancer Careers, we're talking to two people engaged in this work. Our first guest is Dr. Brian Rivers, professor and director of the Cancer Health Equity Institute at Morehouse School of Medicine. Among many prominent roles, he has served as a member of the National Institutes of Health National Advisory Council on Minority Health and Health Disparities. He's a behavioral scientist with a focus on health disparities funded by the NIH and the Patient Centered Outcomes Research Institute, PCORI. Welcome, Dr. Rivers. Brian Rivers: Thank you, Oliver. Thanks for the invitation. Oliver Bogler: So Dr. Rivers, what are cancer health disparities and what is health disparities research? Brian Rivers: So health disparities research basically is poised to help us examine and better understand why cancer disproportionately impacts certain populations more so than others. And so we see these differences. Now differences, that does not necessarily mean a bad thing. But when you look at it from an equity standpoint, and you see the disproportionate impact upon certain populations, the question begs itself, ‘why are these populations suffering more from cancer and the various types of cancer in comparison to some populations who are faring very well?’ This could be in terms of incidence, in terms of prevalence, or in terms of mortality. And so those are sort of epidemiological factors, if you will, that we use to monitor our progress and look at trends in the field and then decide what the approach should be to help address some of these adverse cancer outcomes that we're seeing. Oliver Bogler: So the Cancer Health Equity Institute at Morehouse, which you lead, can you tell us a little bit about that? What are the strategic goals? What do your investigators work on? Brian Rivers: Sure. And so the Cancer Health Equity Institute is nestled within Morehouse School of Medicine that is located in the great city of Atlanta in the great state of Georgia in the southern US corridor. It's surrounded within the Atlanta University complex, where you also have Morehouse College, Spelman College, Clark Atlanta University, and Morris Brown College. And so there's a nice ecosystem of of intellectual thought, if you will, for the furtherance of the betterment of all humanity. And so here within Morehouse School of Medicine, we pride ourselves on being able to lead in the creation and advancement of health equity toward health justice. In a similar vein, congruent with the overall vision and mission of this institution, the Cancer Health Equity Institute is purposed to help better understand those factors that are associated with adverse health outcomes among populations that are within our catchment area. And for our catchment area, it's primarily comprised of African-Americans and then Hispanics. And so we have investigators that are focused on basic science, foundational research. We have investigators that are focused on clinical research, as well as population science. So we tend to cover the entire spectrum. Many of these investigators are funded through the National Institutes of Health, whether it's the National Cancer Institute, the National Institute of Minority Health and Health Disparities, or NHLBI, or NIA, just to name a few. And so these investigators are exploring either within their respective domains of science or even through a transdisciplinary approach. And that's one of the approaches we foster here within the Cancer Health Equity Institute. You know, a little bit different from your NCI designated cancer centers, of which we hopefully will one day attain that designation. But you know, we tend to help foster, you know, cross collaborations across the different sciences as well as with across different disciplines, realizing that, you know, the health disparities conceptual model is multifactorial in scope, meaning it's just not one's, you know, genome that's really, you know, impacting these adverse health outcomes. Or it's not just one's place of residence or their neighborhood or their community in terms of why they're experiencing these disparities. Or it's not just you know having, you know, horrible access to quality cancer care but it's a combination of these factors and that's how we you know pride ourselves and trying to study this very complex phenomena looking at all different factors that may be associated with the adverse outcomes and then studying them collectively, but then also appreciating what we can learn individually from them as well. So we're leading in the advancement and creation of cancer health equity through translational research as well as to focus on the other domains of research as well. Oliver Bogler: So this multidisciplinary of your research program is really interesting to me. And on the podcast, we're very interested in sort of examining all the different kinds of investigators and, you know, knowledge workers, if you will, who can contribute to the fight against cancer. So do you have everything from, sort of bench, basic biologists to economists? What other disciplines are in your teams? Brian Rivers: So we have a wide variety of different disciplines represented. We have immunologists, we have biochemists, you know, we have cancer biologists, we have physician scientists in the lung cancer space and the OB-GYN space and the breast cancer space. And then we have population scientists, behavioral scientists, epidemiologists, policy analysts. We have individuals that are looking at legal epidemiology, looking at the role and impact of state and federal policy, which is our ultimate governance structure for society, and how they help propagate or serve as barriers and or facilitators to health access at the community level, but also within the institutional level as well, and try and address those factors. And so, a wide variety, a wide swath of multidisciplinary investigators, all purpose to come together collaboratively. It takes a lot of professional humility to come together and serve as an MPI, for example, of an R01 grant, realizing that you bring a strength that, collectively, that is much, much greater than what you can bring then individually as an investigator. And hopefully that increases the time in which we're able to better understand some of these pathways to disparities and address them to save lives. Because ultimately, at the end of the day, that's what we're trying to do, address the burden of disease, but then at the same time help save lives. Oliver Bogler: Yeah, I mean, that sounds incredibly fascinating to …, I can imagine being part of one of those teams alongside all these different colleagues could be a really interesting way to engage with this important question. You mentioned a moment ago, a term ‘health justice’, and I wonder if you could just help us or help me understand what's the difference between health justice and health equity. Brian Rivers: Yeah, definitely. So health equity is basically giving individuals what they need in the amount that they need it at the time that they need it. And so providing these portals of access, but really understanding what an individual needs. Health justice is basically the elimination of any structural barriers that may serve as impediments to the uptake of these discoveries once they're made, whether they're at the bench, whether they're within clinical settings, or whether they're even at the population level, such as as different screening campaigns that may even be necessitated to, you know, really help foster early detection among a population that may be suffering from a screenable cancer. And so, you know, we try and remove, you know, the barriers or we try and address the context in which we find an individual battling cancer with, but then we try and get ahead of it, realizing that some populations are at an increased risk for different cancers for one reason or the other.  And so we want to be dutiful to make sure that we're addressing the context in which that individual resides and removing those structural barriers, whether they're within the community such as a free flow of information. And we saw this as a really prominent issue during COVID, where there was just not the free flow of information throughout all of society, where everyone wasn't getting the message of the importance of quarantining or the importance for the vaccine uptake. And we also realized that, you know, especially our constituents in the rural areas, you know, there's still some trust issues with science and research. As we saw vaccine hesitancy really show itself in a prominent way. We thought we were making tremendous progress, especially at the population level, but COVID really revealed some, you know, some gaps that we need to continue to address in the field. Oliver Bogler: I wonder for our listeners who may not be thinking about health inequities on a daily basis as part of their work, whether you could share an example. For example, I know that the incidence and outcomes of cervical cancer in rural Georgia in African Americans and Hispanic women is different from that of people in the city. Or another example, I would just love for you to tell us a little bit about what that looks like at the human level. Brian Rivers: Yeah, I mean, that's a great example within and of itself. If I was to utilize an example that I'm very familiar with and we are currently funded to address is prostate cancer disparities. For example, we see African-American men are more likely to be diagnosed with prostate cancer than any other racial and ethnic group in this country. And we also know that African-Americans are more likely to die from prostate cancer in comparison to other groups. And the question begs itself, why? We know that when this disease is found early, survival rates are incredible. Ten-year survival rates are close to 100 percent. And so, you know, it's incumbent upon us to figure out why are individuals still presenting with advanced stage disease? Are they not getting the screening message? Do they not have access to screening? What role does fear of diagnosis play? What role does fear of the health system play? And what role does fear of cancer in general play? And then if you're residing in a rural area, you know, what type of health system do you have available to you to help foster early detection? And if you need to address, you know, an adverse screening outcome, you know, what kind of help is in place to help you navigate the complexities associated with understanding your cancer diagnosis, but then deciding what treatment is best for me? So with prostate cancer, for example, there's a number of options, depending on stage and and grade of disease, that one has to consider as it relates to treatment. You know, this is not an easy decision by any stretch of the imagination. We've come to develop informed decision aids, shared decision aids. We foster multi-level models that's inclusive of a patient navigation model, utilizing iterations of that, to all evaluate the role and impact of these different strategies to help individuals navigate their way across a cancer continuum. It's challenging in urban areas. It's even more challenging in our rural areas, individuals who elect to go on a radiation therapy. Some individuals in our rural areas have to travel up to three hours each way to Atlanta just for quality care. I mean, that's not going to be easy. Oliver Bogler: And many times, right, in the course of radiation therapy, it's not just one time, right? Brian Rivers: It's not just one time. Oftentimes, it could be three, four times a week over a six, eight week period, which is extremely taxing for someone who perhaps may not have the employment flexibility to have that much time off from work. For example, if someone's working in retail and their duty is to work a cash register, that is a very, very difficult task. And that should not impact your treatment decision. You should not compromise your treatment decision based on, well, the distance is just too far. And I know it's quality care, and it's probably the best care that I could receive, but I'm going to have to settle or compromise because of the social determinants that I'm facing as it relates to accessing these cancer care services. And so that's just one example of how we utilize or how we understand the complexities of an issue, but then how we utilize a transdisciplinary approach to help engage. So currently we have and we're working with our geneticists. with our population scientists, such as the behavioral scientists, as well as our outreach workers, our navigators, and others, you know, to really help build out a strategy that not only addresses the individual, making sure that they are well-informed and well-equipped, but then also addressing the context where we utilize iterations of the navigation model to help them overcome the context and really access these services. And so it is a multilevel approach again, realizing the complexities that often are associated with many of the disparities that we see. I think we learned over the last 10 years that, yes, knowledge is important. Impacting one's knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs is extremely important. But at the same time, if we really want to see behavior change, if we really want to see individuals take advantage of screening or really interface with the health care system in a way that produces better outcomes, then its going to really necessitate an approach that takes into consideration how one navigates their environment. Oliver Bogler: So many points of failure between a person getting screened or a patient getting treatment. Brian Rivers: And we realize, and I think the architects of the Cancer Moonshot Initiative realize the value of screening, realizing that we can really make some significant reductions in cancer mortality if we got people screened. And we know COVID really delayed screening for so many individuals as the health systems overran with COVID patients. And so for two years, and some say three, that individuals have delayed key cancer screenings. You know, guideline appropriate screenings for a variety of reasons. And so, you know, some individuals are projecting that we may see an uptick in advanced stage disease as a result. And so if we're seeing that just in the general population, just imagine a population that has historically experienced disparities. I think those disparities will just be amplified. Oliver Bogler: Dr. Rivers, you are part of a PACHE program. That's a program from our NCI Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities. It stands for Partnerships in Advanced Cancer Health Equity. We'll be talking to Tiffany Wallace from CRCHD after the break. Your PACHE is with Morehouse, of course, Tuskegee University and the University of Alabama Birmingham O'Neill Comprehensive Cancer Center. Can you tell us a little bit about the work that you do with this grant. Brian Rivers:  No, absolutely. And again, I just want to applaud Dr. Sanya Springfield, the visionary behind this initiative, the tremendous staff at the Center to Reduced Cancer Health Disparities, my good friend and colleague Tiffany Wallace. I'm just going to say it's been great. PACHE - Partnerships to Advance Cancer Health Equity - has been probably an initiative that was really intended in a neat way to help raise the tide for all individuals. It brought in institutions that historically were not really considered or envisioned in the National Cancer Act. And so 50 years ago, it was a great mission. It was a great vision by the leaders at the time, you know, to foster and pass the National Cancer Act. And we know that really gave rise and coordination and structure to our cancer infrastructure here in the United States. It helped birth the NCI designated cancer centers, state cancer registries, just to name a few. And so it really helped us better understand and address the issues that cancer brought with it. But there was unevenness in terms of which institutions were awarded NCI designation and why. And we're still working on that. As you know, there's been many additions to the P30 application, which basically gives an institution that designation of NCI, meaning that they're really doing a tremendous job in addressing cancer from prevention, through diagnosis, treatment, and then survivorship as well. So it's really a testament to the type of research as well as the type of care delivery that these institutions are delivering to their constituents. So - awesome program. But then realizing that some individuals in some states didn't even have an NCI designated cancer center, let alone a cancer center. And then there was some institutions that, you know, had tremendous, tremendous reach into populations that were suffering disproportionately from cancer, whether it was breast cancer in African American women or, you know, some Asian populations and liver cancer or, you know, individuals in rural areas that just couldn't access proper screening services. And so the idea I thought, which was an excellent idea by Sanya Springfield and her colleagues, was to help formulate a partnership. where you have these NCI designated cancer centers across the country. But what if we fostered a relationship with them, with minority serving institutions or historically Black colleges and universities? And we know that these institutions have tremendous outreach into the community, given the demographics of the student population of most of these institutions. These are the ones who we want to train and then hopefully go back into their respective communities and have a tremendous impact, based on the skill acquisition, received within the halls of academia. And so the program fosters this relationship. So we are a triad, and we're one of the oldest partnerships in the country. I think we've been trending to year 17. So much so, though, we're starting to now better understand the impact. And the true reduction in cancer-related mortality that we've had in the deep South, our data is that robust now. And we're continuing to learn. And that's one thing I've learned throughout my career, is that you just have to be a life learner. Because so many things are changing. Our understanding is changing. How we address cancer, our approach is all changing. And so now I find myself working with individuals from the National Bioethics Center at Tuskegee, realizing that now I'm in the southern US corridor, an area that is, you know, is very familiar with injustices in research, right? And so, you know, utilizing, you know, a bioethics lens to approach disparities is something that was new to me upon entering into this partnership. So I currently serve as, you know, one of the PIs. I'm the contact principal investigator at Morehouse School of Medicine for our PACHE. As you mentioned, it's with Tuskegee, then O'Neill Conference of Cancer Center at UAB. And we're really trying to address a lot of the issues that we see in some of the poorest regions of the country, which is considered the Black belt region, which spans from Mississippi to Alabama and Georgia, and primarily rural areas, high areas of persistent poverty. I know NCI just came out with an initiative. I was fortunate enough to be on that study panel reviewing that particular initiative. And so, you know, these are individuals that are in the context with depleted resources. But many of our HBCUs and our minority-serving institutions have outreach into these different areas because that's where the students are coming from as well as that's where a lot of community education, community outreach takes place as well. So it's only natural that the partnerships that connect you know with these schools to help foster you know more robust research, more diverse participants in research, strategic outreach that really addresses the needs within one's respective catchment area; help understand the data trends so the epidemiological trends along the lines of incidence and prevalence and mortality; and use that data at the state level to help inform state policy that then dictates the state cancer plan and or funding allocations, but even more so really help NCI better understand sort of the uniqueness of the catchment area in which you're working, then allow for the tailoring and targeting of your approach to really help address cancer within and of itself among all individuals, but then really detailing a strategic approach to those populations, that may be suffering disproportionately from cancer, whether it's prostate, whether it's breast, whether it's cervical, whether it's lung, whether it's ovarian, just to name a few. So the partnership has really been just a tremendous asset for my career. I started in a PACHE, I was trained through a PACHE, and now to find myself in a leadership position is such an honor and a privilege that I really don't take lightly, but I really consider this golden opportunity to really make a difference and to really help advance the science. Oliver Bogler: I want to return to one of your leadership roles as Director of the Institute for Cancer Health Equity at Morehouse. What is your vision for the Institute? Where is it going? Brian Rivers: And so we are actively recruiting nationally. We've been able to secure some tremendous talent over the last year. I really applaud the efforts of our President and CEO, Dr. Valerie Montgomery Rice, who was a trainee of Dr. Springfield's in the iCURE program. And she gave her first training grant, or research training grant. And so, you know, she's still in that vein of really trying to, you know, address, you know, a lot of the disparities that we see in cancer. I really applaud the work of our new dean from the University of Florida, Adrian Tyndall, all of his efforts and how he's been able to attract, you know, some new talent, especially in the cancer space. And so ultimately in three to five, maybe seven years, we hope to be, you know, the first NCI designated cancer center on the campus of an HBCU that's uniquely poised to address cancer health equity leading towards health justice. And this should be reflected in how we train our learners of tomorrow, whether they're our biomedical students or whether they're our medical students or our physician assistants or our public health students. It should be reflected in terms of Morehouse Health Care or how we deliver care to the community. And it should also be reflected in our research pillar in terms of the type of research that we conduct. We don't feel that we are competing with other centers but we are finding that niche that, you know, we have the talent, we have the bandwidth and we have the institutional support and structure to really advance health equity across all pillars. Learn ... the academia, clinical, as well as research. And so hopefully, you know, we will see that vision actualized. I know it's going to take a lot of work [laughs], but we've been working at this for quite some time and, you know, I've really been socializing this idea with many of my colleagues in the field and there's tremendous support. I'm just realizing we're nestled and just the need. Realizing that African Americans continue to experience the highest cancer-related mortality for most cancers. Even though a lot of cancer-related mortalities are on the decline for all populations, we're still seeing a disproportionate impact of certain cancers among African Americans. We think, given the heterogeneity of African Americans that we have here in Atlanta and the state of Georgia, that we have some unique contributions that we can render toward advancing science for all individuals, both nationally as well as globally. Oliver Bogler: Sounds like an exciting time in your institute and at Morehouse in general. We'll be sure to put some links in the show notes so people can easily find your institute and maybe there's a job that they can apply for. You never know. Brian Rivers: Absolutely. We've taken all comers, you know, especially those with NIH funding. Oliver Bogler: There you go. So Dr. Rivers, I want to pivot slightly to another role. So we work together on the Science, Education and Career Advancement Committee for the American Association for Cancer Research. You chair that committee. You've also chaired AACR's Minorities in Cancer Research Council. And I wonder what role does AACR, a big association of over 50,000 cancer research professionals, what role does this organization play in the work of cancer health disparities and also in promoting the diversity of our cancer research workforce? Brian Rivers: Yeah, yeah, I mean, excellent topics, Oliver. You know, I just can't say enough about Dr. Marge Foti, the CEO of AACR, the American Association for Cancer Research. She has been tremendous to the field in terms of, and globally, just not in the field domestically, but also globally as well. She has really fostered approaches that helps toward the prevention of cancer. But then also, if you you should find yourself with a diagnosis of cancer, the best treatment that one can have through providing platforms for scientists and others to come and opine and share best practices and strategies, recent discoveries, different approaches toward disparities. She's been a leader in that regard. I mean, AACR was the first professional organization to really have a meeting uniquely focused on cancer health disparities, on understanding the science of cancer health disparities among racial and ethnic minorities. And that cancer, man, that conference, we just celebrated 16 years of that conference being in existence. And it's growing by leaps and bounds. Outside of the annual meeting, it's the second most popular conference that AACR actually hosts. And they host quite a few conferences. And so I applaud Marge for just her vision and just providing opportunities. She's always evolving. Another thing that, you know, in positions of leadership within that organization that I've been able to really be a part of was the inaugural Cancer Disparities Progress Report, which is produced every other year. The parent progress report is produced annually, and the cancer disparities progress report is produced every other year. So this is a tool that many of us use in the field. This is a tool that goes to Congress to help shape federal policy. But then we also use it at the state level as well. And it's really just a report card to really provide an assessment of the progress that we're making. Because we do want to celebrate progress. We don't want to always have a conversation from a deficit, but also from the assets, realizing that we've put a tremendous amount of resources toward this issue and that we're seeing the impact of that investment of resources. And so that's what the progress report really demonstrates, the progress that we’ve made, but then the directions we need to attenuate to going forward. Marge has held several focus groups that many of us were a part of that really helped address some of the key factors that we know are in the field, such as clinical trial participation among diverse individuals. We had a think tank, if you will, in 2018 that brought together leaders from around the world to really help develop strategies and a plan to increase diverse representation in clinical trials. I wasn’t a part of a similar think tank, which really gave rise to the Cancer Disparities Conference, but many of my colleagues were. So to find myself in leadership positions now, I think, is extremely meaningful. It's a monumental task before us, I think you know very well. I mean, we serve on the Science, Education, and Career Advancement Committee. And that's the other side. The research is extremely important. And we really foster that NIH-funded research, of course, within the Cancer Health Equity Institute here at Morehouse School of Medicine. But workforce diversity is also germane to our approach, as well. And working through AACR, we're able to attenuate that, through Science Ed and the Career Advancement Committee that we serve on. Whether it's high school students, whether it's, you know, undergraduate students, whether it's graduate students at the master or doctoral level, whether it's individuals that are postdoctoral fellows or folks in their residency, that organization provides such a unique platform for training and for networking, especially for those that are pursuing careers within academic or government settings. It really helps foster the professional development one needs to really be successful in the field. And so I definitely enjoy my time. Again, I consider these leadership positions an honor and privilege. And then I know the calling that we have upon us as a committee to make sure that we're meeting the needs of those individuals that are coming behind us and that will be leaders one day in the field as well. Oliver Bogler: Yeah, and I'll just mention that AACR has an associate membership level, which is designed for people in those different career, early career stages that you mentioned, students, graduate students, very affordable and gives you access to this tremendous network. I want to turn to your own path. You know, we're a career focused podcast. I'm always interested in, you know, what made you want to do the thing you do today when you look back even, you know, to your early years, what sparked your interest in science and in cancer health disparities ultimately. Brian Rivers: Yeah, absolutely. So, you know, originally I'm from Buffalo, New York. Parents transitioned to Atlanta. Dad was in corporate America in the financial sector. So that's what got us down into the South. A lot of families are still in upstate New York. And so when we moved here, it was a bit of a culture shock. Things were different, to say the least. And my mom is an educator as well. And so she's been a primary school teacher for 40 plus years. And so there was always this fostering of education. I always just had a knack and interest in science. I don't know if that stemmed from my interest in the Encyclopedia Brown books and I love mysteries and trying to solve the mystery before the end of the book. And so always looking at a problem and trying to find solutions for the problem has always been a knack and I think science parallels nicely with that. My love for mystery books and mystery movies and science where you identify a problem but then you have to research and find a solution. So growing up I had chemistry sets and microscopes. I mean I loved the science fairs. I built solar, you know, ovens back in the 80s where I was out manipulating, you know. I did the traditional volcano understanding, you know, chemical reactions with baking soda. I mean, I just, you know, love science and, you know, just, I was able to foster that through high school. I went to a magnet high school, was focused on engineering. My initial focus was biomedical engineering. I went to Frederick Douglas High School, a public school here in Atlanta. From there I transitioned to Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee. I was a biology major, and my exposure just opened up tremendously at Vandy. I mean, I had tremendous exposure here in Atlanta through high school, as well as elementary, but Vanderbilt just opened my eyes up to the world and saw the possibilities that were endless. And how I framed and looked at careers totally changed. And I began to do more volunteering as a result, because I was intrigued by better understanding these different careers that historically I had not been exposed to. And so I moved from engineering, of course, biomedical engineering, more into just pure biology. And it was fascinating. And botany was wonderful. We would go out in the woods and learn what plants you can eat and what insects you can eat. And it was just fascinating. I really enjoyed it. Oliver Bogler: Very cool. Brian Rivers: So I began to volunteer. I volunteered at Meharry Medical College and TSU and Fisk and through the church that I was attending at the time within Nashville and just got exposed to public health. And then I started seeing how some populations are faring. It really came to a head when I volunteered in the VUMC, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, ER, and the type of accidents and tragedies that were coming in… many were because of just poor management of disease or undiagnosed disease. And it was just striking. It was an alarming phenomenon that was happening. So I graduated, Vandy, came back, pursued a master's in public health. I got exposure through public health in Nashville. So I was at Morehouse School of Medicine, second class of their, at the time, brand new public health program. And the miles are further widening. I was part of some NIH grants that took me across the entire state of Georgia. I was part of the Governor's Honors Program. And again, just seeing just the need outside of Atlanta that existed as it relates to health and wellness. And even from a prevention side, you know, really, you know, struck a chord with me. And so I ended up, you know, doing a genogram, if you will, in one of my classes. And the task was to go and do sort of a mapping of your family history, but detailing their health history. And if you could get the information, detail what one particular relative died from, or as a result of. So doing that, I started seeing this common thread of cancer in the family. I was like, wow. And then I saw prostate cancer. It's like, ‘Huh, what is that?’ I was a biology major. I didn't really focus on the prostate gland that much in biology and anatomy. And so doing more research led me to discover that certain populations are disproportionately impacted by prostate cancer. And there's still so many unanswered questions in terms of the why. So I ended up doing a thesis on prostate cancer while I was enrolled in the public health program. And it was just an epidemiological study, just looking at knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs toward prostate cancer screening. And lo and behold, so many people had never heard of prostate cancer, let alone a prostate gland, let alone prostate screening. Wow, this is incredible. These are like life-saving guidelines that you should be familiar with. Are you interfacing with your health care provider on a regular basis? And so did the thesis and then ended up getting recruited over to a PhD program at UAB, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Public Health. I was in the Department of Health Behavior. Again, got tremendous exposure to the Black belt, but I was actually down in Selma doing focus groups. Selma, Alabama, a very, very historical place, but I was down there doing focus groups, working on a grant at the time. Dr. Mona Fouad was the PI of analyzing the gap between Black and whites as it relates to prostate cancer. So I did some focus groups with providers, trying to understand, again, barriers and facilitators. Got recruited out early of my PhD program, working with my mentor, Dr. Lee Green. He was recruited to Texas, so he ended up … and recruited me to Texas A&M where I got involved in HDEART, a health disparities consortium that was led by Lovell Jones and others, and again, really, really took off in the disparity space. I think right around the time David Satcher passed some national legislation as Surgeon General during Bill Clinton's administration that really gave rise to a center at NIH for to study this phenomenon called health disparities, which was still very new. Again, we knew the outcomes of the Heckler report during Reagan's administration about the excessive deaths that take place among Blacks and other minority populations. But there was just the Office of Minority Health, I think, at the time that had been developed to help address some of those issues that were in the Heckler Report. But then David Satcher came on board and passed a key legislation that really helped inform some infrastructure at NIH to further develop and stand up. It was just an incredible time of free flow, John Ruffin and others, Sanya Springfield, other leaders at NIH, you know, really began to put RFAs out. And I really saw a path forward for me as a career because prior to, I was told that could be an add-on, health disparities research, but that cannot be your main stay. And we do not know if you choose the academic route, if that will suffice for tenure and promotion. Got recruited out of finished up the PhD and got into a postdoc out there in Texas, then got recruited to Moffitt Cancer Center, where I was on the faculty in the Department of Health Outcomes and Behavior under the leadership of Paul Jacobsen and Tom Sellers. Bill Dalton was the CEO at the time. And just sitting down talking with all of them was just incredible. Their passion, their drive, their innovativeness, and just their approach to addressing cancer from a prevention framework as well as from a control and treatment framework was just incredible. And so I was on the faculty there for about… at least 11 years before I got recruited to Morehouse School of Medicine where I met Dr. Valerie Montgomery Rice serving on the National Advisory Council for NIMHD. And from there, you know, she laid out her vision, and this was about 2014, you know, we really need a cancer center to help galvanize resources and talent to really address the complexities. And she was so tired of hearing all of the disparities that she knew as a physician could be prevented that were resulting in people dying from the disease. And so, you know, that was my track. That was my trajectory of how I got here to where I am today and my understanding of the field from a research perspective, but even more so a workforce diversity perspective. I think that both have to go in alignment if we really want to see a change in the field. Oliver Bogler: You've really seen a tremendous change then, positive change in your area of interest, right? Brian Rivers: Absolutely. Oliver Bogler: I mean, it didn't exist in the way that it does today, even 20 years ago. And well, that's phenomenal. Thank you for sharing that. I wonder then in that context, what advice you might give to people listening who are maybe just exploring or beginning to understand what health disparities research is. And if they're interested in this, what could they start by doing? Brian Rivers: I mean, there's tremendous resources at the National Institutes of Health, NCI in particular. There's a number of programs that individuals could be a part of at any stage they are, whether it's high school, whether it's undergrad, whether it's grad. Your Center, Oliver, the Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities, the iCURE program, all of these are programs to help foster insight into having a career in cancer, whether it's at the bench, whether it's at the bedside. whether it's at the community or even a policy level. So you have to reach out and get involved. I will strongly encourage individuals to network at conferences. Oftentimes we're so intrigued by the location of the meeting. We go in, we have our presentation, whether it's a poster or a podium, but we fail to really take advantage of the context of the meeting where we're networking, where we're meeting program officers. Instead of sending those emails trying to get them to respond, many of the program officers at NIH, especially NCI, attend meetings and are there for multiple days. And so I would strongly encourage individuals to value the strength of networking and identifying, through networking, mentors. And you shouldn't just have one. I'm a strong believer, and I've always been trained, that you should have a mentoring team of at least five to seven individuals. Some you talk to monthly. Some you may talk to once or twice a year. And everyone serves a different role. One could be, you know, your scientific editor. One could help you sort of envision, you know, and strategize, and others could just be for professional development. Whatever role that particular person plays, it's good to have them part of a team because the field is changing so fast. And, you know...there's a strong need to foster team science. And no one wins, you know, just, you know, ‘I'm the Lone Ranger and I'm gonna go out and cure cancer tomorrow’. But it really takes collaboration, it takes partnering, and it takes, you know, a certain level of humility to really help address these issues. And so that would be my advice, you know, take advantage of conferences or any public gathering of, you know, thought leaders, such as yourself, Oliver, that can really help shape your path going forward. Oliver Bogler: Well thank you very much Dr. Rivers for sharing all this great information and your own path with us. Brian Rivers: Well, thank you for having me. I really enjoyed the conversation. Oliver Bogler: Stick around after the break, we'll be talking to Dr. Tiffany Wallace of the NCI's Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities. [music] Oliver Bogler: The NCI wants to hear from you about what we are doing to support early career cancer investigators. We have released a new Request for Information or RFI. It is entitled Inviting Comments and Suggestions on the National Cancer Institute’s Support of Early Career, Mentored Cancer Researchers and Trainees. NCI is committed to supporting the training and development of the next generation of the cancer research workforce. We are seeking input on our existing approaches and your ideas for innovations we might explore - all designed to improve how we support you. We invite suggestions and comments on all the career stages we support from middle school, high school, undergraduate and graduate studies through postdoc and fellowship to early research independence. NCI is interested in your opinion on how our grant awards are structured and positioned and whether they could be improved to meet the needs of a diverse cancer research workforce. Your feedback on this matter would be greatly appreciated. Responses are due by December 29, 2023. We’ll put a link in the show notes, but for questions, please contact nci_earlycareer_rfi@mail.nih.gov. We look forward to hearing from you. [music] Oliver Bogler: Okay, and we're back. It's a pleasure to welcome Dr. Tiffany Wallace, a colleague from the NCI. Welcome, Tiffany. Tiffany Wallace: It's a pleasure to be here. Oliver Bogler: Dr. Wallace is a program director in NCI's Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities, where she serves as the lead for the Disparities and Equity Program, DEP, and works to coordinate and strengthen NCI's overall cancer disparity research portfolio, encompassing basic, clinical, translational, and population-based research. Before the break, we spoke to Dr. Rivers about his work in health disparities. So let's jump right into NCI's engagement. Tiffany, what is the DEP, and how does it address this field? Tiffany Wallace: So the center that I work in, the Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities, has a really large mission and it's split between two areas. The first is promoting cancer health disparities research and the second is to focus on diversity training and workforce diversity. So my role within the DEP is focused on that first part of promoting disparities research. As an aside, this program is going to be evolving into a full-fledged branch soon. So I'm very excited about that. But our charge is really to develop and advance research programs that address cancer health disparities and to promote health equity. And so in addition to building our own research initiatives, a huge part of what we do is to work collaboratively across all of the divisions, offices, and centers at NCI. We're interested in research that spans all research disciplines. So from basic to pop[ulation] science to clinical and across the whole continuum of cancer. So from prevention through diagnosis and treatment, survivorship and beyond. And so really collaborating and coordinating across NCIs is very key to what we do. Oliver Bogler: You mentioned a moment ago the word branch. That's a little bit of NIH lingo. That's like a department, right? Tiffany Wallace: Yes, right now it's a little bit more of an informal program and it'll be a little bit more of a formal branch soon. Oliver Bogler: So early on in our podcast, we had a couple of program officers on the show. And so we've talked about how program officers interact with grants portfolios. But I want to make sure I understand the way your group, soon to be a branch, interacts with all these other groups of program officers in the divisions and centers you mentioned. So are you holding those grants or are you working together with those folks to hold the grants in those divisions? Tiffany Wallace: Well, a combination. So, you know, our program certainly holds our own programs and research and we manage those grants. And then we work together collaboratively across the divisions. They hold the grant, but we certainly work to help make sure the initiatives have considered health disparities research and, you know, to help manage the product of the research. Oliver Bogler: So why is NCI interested in health disparities research? Tiffany Wallace: Health disparities are in a huge area. I think this is a bit of an evolving field. It's still relatively early, and there's a lot to be accomplished. But I do think that it's something that, whether or not we can eliminate completely, we certainly have the power to significantly reduce health disparities. And so we're making progress. We have a lot more to go, but it's such an important issue that affects so many people in society. Oliver Bogler: So you've already alluded to the sort of breadth of your portfolio and the portfolio across the NCI and the challenges facing people engaged in this work, right? I mean, there are some significant systemic challenges. How do you measure progress and what does that look like? Tiffany Wallace: Well, that's a difficult question. You know, certainly we can look at small benchmarks. We can look at the amount of research we're supporting and see the impact of the publications coming out. You know, I think really measuring progress is going to see that the rates of cancer incidence and the poor outcomes that we're seeing disproportionately across populations is where we're really going to be able to measure success. We see some incremental and sustained progress in this, but like I mentioned before, there's so much more that we have to accomplish before we really can even start to say we've made an impact. Oliver Bogler: So as you think about the portfolio, what are the main areas of engagement right now that are most important, that you feel are going to make the most impact? Tiffany Wallace: Well, I think, you know, so much of what research that's been done in this area has been done largely in silos. So basic researchers have been focusing on biology and, you know, other population focus has been looking more at the epidemiological data and then community-based and engaged research is looking, you know, specifically at the community. I think to see progress, you know, we really need to be better intersecting these factors that contribute to disparities and take a more complex approach to what we're doing. We're making investments across all different areas, as I mentioned, different disciplines, so basic biology, population science, clinical, and we're making some significant advancements in these areas. What I think what we really are trying to focus more on now is embracing the complexity of health disparities, where we're better trying to incorporate some biological aspects with social science aspects, with more clinical aspects, and put them all together with a real eye on including the community in the development of these research proposals. So I think that's where we're heading and where we're going to see some real improvements. Oliver Bogler: Your mechanisms, your portfolio consists of research, academic folks, learning and researching and understanding mechanisms and underlying factors and so on. How do you then take that information and make sure that it transforms how healthcare is delivered or the outcomes in the community? Tiffany Wallace: Yeah, I mean, our goal, I think, is to collect as much information to understand what the causes are for health disparities and to try out some implementation science and see what sort of interventions can be useful. But I think that, you know, all we can do is provide the information. We don't control policies. But, you know, we have to hope that what we're finding out provides enough information that we can start changing some of the policies that might be at the root cause of some of these disparities. And so we continue to make progress and hope that it makes an impact. Oliver Bogler: NCI is also increasing its investment in this portfolio, has been for the last several years, I'm sure that's going on across the country. What's your impression of the trends in cancer health disparities research, say over the last five or 10 years? Tiffany Wallace: As I alluded to before, I think the trends are really starting to see these multidisciplinary approaches, these large kind of system science approaches where we're really trying to get different disciplines interacting and speaking with each other. So we know that biology is not a driver of disparities, but perhaps is a contributor. We know that largely the drivers are social determinants of health and impacts from environment. But getting these different aspects of science to interact and to really make the big picture clearer, I think that's where we're heading. Oliver Bogler: And if I could ask you to project maybe five or ten years into the future, where do you think we'll be? Tiffany Wallace: I think we'll have moved beyond identifying what the disparities are. Maybe we'll be a little bit further in developing some sustainable interventions and starting to have a better understanding of the root causes and aiming our interventions more at not just fixing the problem we see but getting to interventions that could perhaps stop the problem from starting. Oliver Bogler: That sounds exciting and I hope it comes true. Tiffany Wallace: Me too, you know, I don't know, five years is a short time. Maybe a little bit further out, but it's the direction I think we're all hoping to head. Oliver Bogler: So I understand you also oversee a portfolio of grant mechanisms promoting basic and translational cancer research and initiatives to stimulate research in underfunded areas. Can you tell us a little bit about that work? Tiffany Wallace: Yeah, so when I started my role in the center, I took over a program that's been around for, you know, quite some time. It started in 2010, and that's focused on basic research in health disparities. This is a collaboration with DCB, Division of Cancer Biology and DCP, Division of Cancer Prevention. It's really focused on understanding the biological contributors of disparities, a focus on more of the mechanistically focused studies. What's been interesting though is that since this started in 2010, we've really seen this program grow and evolve with the field. As I mentioned, we understand biology is likely not a driver of disparities, but maybe just one contributor. And so it's been great to see that many of the proposals coming in and being funded have more of a focus looking at these social determinants and the environment and investigating how these factors are getting under the skin, influencing biology, not just looking at germline risk factors. We have some other programs with more of a focus on translational research. So this has been two programs I'm very proud of that I started working on early in my role in CRCHD. I really had an interest to see some basic research findings translate better into the clinic or, you know, relate to public health. And so through some very strategic collaborations, mostly with the Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, we had these two programs start up about in 2018. The first is the PDXNet, right? This is a network that was designed to advance precision medicine research efforts. Oliver Bogler: What's a PDX, sorry, for our audience? Tiffany Wallace: A patient-derived xenograft. And so this is a patient, a cancer model that's derived directly from patient tissue. And the network in general is designed to do this collaborative development of these patient-derived models and then use these models, kind of like a little mini clinical trial in animals, to test these therapeutic agents that are very targeted. Oliver Bogler:  Because the PDX models are much more faithful to the human disease, right? Tiffany Wallace: Exactly, they've gone much further than a traditional cell line and they incorporate some of the heterogeneity that you see in the tumors and they're kind of shown here in the animal model. And so the goal of this network is really to help us with a prioritization and a rationale for what sorts of agents should be going into early phase trials. And what we did is we joined this network and we fund a few of these centers that have a real focus on developing models from underserved or underrepresented populations to increase representation of these models that better reflect the community. And also they're asking research questions on why do we see some therapeutic outcome disparities and better understand what might be going on there. So I'm super excited that we just got reissued and it's starting a new round of research and it's been very productive. Another area that we've been working on are with the SPOREs, the research, Specialized Programs Of Research Excellence. For this, we've collaborated closely with the Translational Research Program, which is the home of the SPOREs. If you're familiar with this program, they've been around for over 30 years, and the hallmark of it is translational research. And so most people, when they know of a SPORE, these are large prestigious grants, they're organized by the organ site. So you might know a breast SPORE or prostate cancer SPORE. But they also encourage programs to focus in on more thematic areas, so like addressing health disparities. But despite disparities being a real priority area for the SPOREs, we haven't had a SPORE with a focus in on health disparities. And so we started a planning grant opportunity to help these investigative teams get more competitive in making an application focused in on addressing health disparities. In total we were able to fund 12 planning grants, and they span so many different cancer sites and different populations, and we're super excited to see where they go. Oliver Bogler: That's a lot. So traditional SPORE, I used to be part of a brain tumor SPORE before I came to NCI. Traditional SPOREs are groups of projects that are all translational, as you said, and they're trying to head to the clinic, right? Or they're connected to the clinic. And the idea is that the project sort of mature out of the SPOREs as they become clinical trials and new projects come in. Is that the same way that you're constructing the health disparity SPORE? Tiffany Wallace: Exactly, yes. They have the same requirements and they're doing early phase clinical trials to try to address these research questions. Now, we haven't had a full SPORE come in even yet with these planning grants to date, but the TRP is leading a new RFA and hopefully we're going to see more. These are going to be just like a regular SPORE, but using a cooperative agreement mechanism and to see some of these research questions related to health disparities and minority health be investigated in this program. Oliver Bogler:  And that's the Translational Research Program that's going to issue a request for applications just to expand on those acronyms. Tiffany Wallace: Yes, acronyms, I'm sorry, I speak federal. Oliver Bogler:  Not at all. Yes, it's part of our DNA, which is deoxyribonucleic acid, in case you're wondering. Fantastic, thank you very much. Those are also, that sounds like a great new program as well. Excited to see what happens there. You have many roles at NCI, Tiffany. You also serve as the co-chair of a working group that's part of NCI's Equity and Inclusion Program. The working group is called Enhancing Research to Address Cancer Health Disparities. Obviously, something near and dear to your heart. You work with Dr. James Doroshow and Dr. Worta McCaskill-Stevens on that. I wonder, what is the focus of that group or obviously the title is suggested, but what have you been up to with that working group? Tiffany Wallace: Yeah, this working group is very overlapping with the work that I do in depth that we talked about. I couldn't have been luckier than to be teamed up with Dr. James Doroshow and Dr. Worta McCaskill-Stevens. I mean, they're just notable names and such impact in the field. Some of what we've done has been focusing on soliciting input from various thought leaders and community members about, you know, what recommendations they have for helping us to advance the field of disparities and promote health equity. And we've had some other activities more focused on supporting research in the area that we thought were very important, things like how we could better increase clinical trial diversity and how we could advance persistent poverty research agenda, which is a big focus right now within the NCI. So we have a bunch of other activities in the works, looking a little bit more maybe broadly at some policies that we could consider. Trying to encourage more investigators that aren't doing disparities research to still use an equity lens when they're putting their proposals together. So we're doing a lot of different activities that kinda all go in a different direction. Oliver Bogler:  I'd like to talk about your own path, your own career a little bit. Always fascinated to learn how people got into science. So what sparked your initial interest in science broadly? Tiffany Wallace: Well, I've always been a bit of a science nerd. I think we all share that in common. This goes back to elementary school, so it's not surprising that I chose to pursue this in graduate school. I did my initial graduate studies focusing really on signal transduction work, cardiovascular, really far removed from anything clinically relevant or, you know, public health related. So for my post-doc, I really wanted to come and make it a little more personal, go into cancer research. I think everybody in, you know, by now has been touched by cancer in some way, and you know, I had that through some family members, and so I was really lucky to join the lab here at NCI with Dr. Stefan Ambs in the Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis where he was, you know, combining basic research interests that I had, but with more of a molecular epidemiology slant to look at aggressive markers for prostate cancer and breast cancer. And so we had this great case control cohort and it was really wonderful to be able to look at these differences that we were seeing by ancestry and understanding why some patients were more at risk of prostate cancer and aggressive disease than others. So it really sparked my passion for understanding what the causes were and it's really been the end of the story for me. I've just been growing and focusing in this field since then. Oliver Bogler: So there is this saying that I've heard before, which is that when you think about your health outcomes, your zip code is more important than your genetic code. So it sounds to me like you almost moved from the genetic code to the zip code between your post-doc and what you're doing today. Is that fair? Tiffany Wallace: Yeah, I mean, I think I firmly have one foot in genetic and the other in the zip code area. I realize how important both of those aspects are and really kind of combining it, I think, is really key. Oliver Bogler: So what though triggered, you know, you were doing your postdoc, you were interested in biomarkers, what then made you wish to transition both in terms of your role and what you do day to day, and also in that shift in focus, if you will, from genetic to zip. Tiffany Wallace: Well, the focus from genetics to zip just happened organically. I don't think you can be working in the field of health disparities and not have appreciation for all the competing and complex factors that contribute to disparities. And so while my training and my passion is still very much in the more genetics side of things, I would only be able to take the field so far without kind of expanding. And so as part of the new branch, you know, we're going to be hiring and looking for program officers to join with unique and complementary expertise so we can, you know, work to get a better view of exactly what's happening and how we could better tackle these hard issues and hard problems. Oliver Bogler: And then I guess that's the same reason then that you moved from a sort of right on the interface of research to being in a program role, you wanted to broaden your impact, I imagine. Tiffany Wallace: Yeah, I mean I guess nothing's as simple as that. I knew from the very beginning I wanted to go into industry. I wanted to work at a biopharmaceutical company and I did do just that. After my post-doc I went into a company, Human Genome Sciences. They have since been bought out by GlaxoSmithKline. I really loved it there to be honest with you. So it goes to show no one's career path is a straight line, right? It always takes its turns. But, you know, I definitely, I missed working in the field of disparities and I had twins at the same time as my company got bought out and it made me do some soul searching. And coming back into the government felt like the right change for me and focusing back in on health disparities just seemed like a really nice organic fit for what I wanted to accomplish. Oliver Bogler: And an exciting time in the field with all that's going on. Tiffany Wallace: Yeah, I mean it continues to get more and more attention, which is just wonderful. Oliver Bogler: So then lastly, people listening to our conversation wondering maybe how they could become engaged in health disparities research or how they could even just add that lens to their own work. What's your advice to our listeners? Tiffany Wallace: Well, if you're interested in doing disparities research, I wholly encourage you to go for it. You know, all research should be rewarding, but I think doing this line of work just is truly special. You know, there's a real need for making an impact in this space, and we have a long way to go. I think, as I mentioned, we're kind of at the early stages of this field, and a lot more to learn and grow. If I were to give advice, it would be to be open to having diverse training experiences as you're getting more in tune with this area. Lean into the different disciplines and really seek out collaborations outside of your comfort zone or what would seem traditional for you to do. We really need data scientists working with basic researchers and staying in tune with the social scientists and really prioritizing and incorporating the community into all the research. And so I guess that would be the path forward is, you know, don't stay too focused. Keep an open mind. Oliver Bogler: And what might some resources be that our listeners could access? We talked to Dr. Rivers in the first part of the show, and he, of course, heads an institute at Morehouse. So if you're at Morehouse, just go connect with him. But what about elsewhere or online things that you might recommend? Tiffany Wallace: Well, if you're just getting into this field or you really wanna look at the state of the science, I think tuning in, if you're not familiar with it, AACR does a Cancer Disparities Progress Report. They publish this every two years. The first one started in 2020, and it's really a really comprehensive review of the field. And what I really like is they put some explicitly stated call to action recommendations in there that are just so important, and they intermingle it with stories from patient advocates, so it makes it very special. If you already know that you're into this field, you're looking for collaborators, then going to the AACR Disparities Meeting, they have one every year focused only on the science of health disparities. They just had the 16th one earlier this month. It's one I go to every year, and it's a great place for establishing some collaborations and hearing about the exciting things. But it's a hot area. If you're interested in this, you can get a seminar on it probably weekly here on really interesting topics. Persistent Poverty just started a new seminar series that's open to the public that I definitely recommend checking out. So… Oliver Bogler: Those are some great recommendations. We'll put links in the show notes as always. Well, thank you very much, Tiffany, for coming and sharing your insights and your experience. Thank you. Tiffany Wallace: Oh, absolutely. It was a pleasure. Thank you for the invitation. [music] Oliver Bogler: Now it's time for a segment we call Your Turn, because it's a chance for our listeners to send in recommendations that they would like to share. If you're listening, then you're invited to take your turn. Send us a tip for a book, a video, a podcast or a talk or anything that you found inspirational or amusing or interesting. You can send those to us at NCIICC@nih.gov. Record a voice memo and send it along. We may just play it on an upcoming episode. Now I'd like to invite our guests to take their turn. Let's start with you, Dr. Rivers. Brian Rivers: OK, so my recommendation will be for everyone to familiarize yourself with the American Association for Cancer Research Cancer Disparities Progress Report. Again, this report is produced every other year. And it really helps explore issues and provides an action plan, if you will, toward addressing health disparities and advancing health equity. So it's a tremendous document. It covers many of the cancers. It covers workforce diversity. Covers research, care delivery, recent advances in the field. It just really gives you a nice comprehensive overview of where we are in the field and what needs to happen. And it really helps attenuate and highlight a lot of the great funding that NCI has put forth toward helping us better understand cancer, most importantly, eliminate cancer. And so I strongly encourage everyone, if you haven't, familiarize yourself with the AACR Cancer Disparities Progress Report. Please do. You will not regret it. Oliver Bogler: It's a great recommendation, a great way to start learning about this field and what's going on. Thank you for that. Brian Rivers: Thank you, Oliver. Oliver Bogler: Tiffany, what's your recommendation? Tiffany Wallace: Okay, I thought about this a little bit. I stream a fair amount of TV series to unwind with my husband and just relax. And, you know, one that I really like, I'm watching it currently, I'm only two episodes in, so you know, more to come, is this documentary that's called Live to 100. I don't know if you heard about it, Secrets of the Blue Zones. So. Oliver Bogler: I have not heard of this, no? Interesting. Tiffany Wallace:  No, it's very interesting. So they've done all this work previously to identify these areas they call blue zones that have higher frequency of people living over 100. And they're trying to understand what gives people in these areas longer longevity. A lot of what they're finding is what you would think, links to diet and exercise. But some of it's a little bit more interesting. Some differences on lifestyle or social circles or philosophies and it's always good to hear some recommendations on how to improve your health and my kids even like it at 11 years old so I would recommend it. Oliver Bogler: For sure. That's cool. Okay, thanks. We'll dig that out and put a link in it into the show notes as well. I'd like to make a recommendation as well. It's for a new book from Dr. Jorge Cham, who's I think famous for his PhD comics, piled higher and deeper. A lot of people are familiar with those. And actually, I think in our very first episode, we had a recommendation for them. He's got a new book and it's called Oliver's Universe. So, I'm naturally drawn to it, of course, because the protagonist has such a great name, but it's also because it's funny, it's enjoyable, and it talks about science in a way that young people of all ages can enjoy. If you have a middle schooler in your life and are looking for a way to get them thinking about STEM, take a look at this great new book, Oliver in the Comics is 11, so that gives you an idea of the age focus. So we'll put a link to that one as well. And if you're listening and you want to send a recommendation in, please do so as well. That’s all we have time for on today’s episode of Inside Cancer Careers! Thank you for joining us and thank you to our guests. We want to hear from you – your stories, your ideas and your feedback are always welcome. And you are invited to take your turn to make a recommendation we can share with our listeners. You can reach us at NCIICC@nih.gov. Inside Cancer Careers is a collaboration between NCI’s Office of Communications and Public Liaison and the Center for Cancer Training. It is produced by Angela Jones and Astrid Masfar. Join us every first and third Thursday of the month when new episodes can be found wherever you listen – subscribe so you won’t miss an episode. I'm your host Oliver Bogler from the National Cancer Institute and I look forward to sharing your stories here on Inside Cancer Careers. If you have questions about cancer or comments about this podcast, email us at NCIinfo@nih.gov or call us at 800-422-6237. And please be sure to mention Inside Cancer Careers in your query. We are a production of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute. Thanks for listening.  
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Skin Cancer Treatment - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/skin/patient/skin-treatment-pdq
txt:  General Information About Skin Cancer  Stages of Skin Cancer  Treatment Option Overview  Treatment of Basal Cell Carcinoma  Treatment of Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Skin  Treatment of Actinic Keratosis  To Learn More About Skin Cancer  About This PDQ Summary  Skin cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in
		  the tissues of the skin. Different types of cancer start in the skin. Having a fair complexion and being exposed to sunlight  are risk factors for basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, and actinic keratosis often appear as a change in the skin. Tests or procedures that examine the skin are used to diagnose basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Certain factors affect prognosis (chance
		  of recovery) and treatment options. The skin is the body’s largest organ. It protects against heat,
		  sunlight, injury, and infection. Skin also helps  control body temperature and stores water, fat, and vitamin D.  The skin has several layers, but the two main layers are the epidermis (upper or outer layer) and the dermis (lower or inner layer). Skin cancer begins in the epidermis, which is made up of three kinds of cells: Squamous cells:  Thin, flat cells that form  the top layer  of the epidermis. Basal cells: Round cells under the squamous cells. Melanocytes:  Cells that make melanin and are found
		  in the lower part of the epidermis. Melanin is the pigment
		  that gives skin its natural color. When skin is exposed to the sun, melanocytes
		  make more pigment and cause the skin to darken. Skin cancer can occur anywhere on the body, but it is most common in skin that is often exposed   to sunlight, such as the face, neck, and hands. Skin cancer may form in basal cells or squamous cells. Basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma are the most common types of skin cancer. They are also called nonmelanoma skin cancer. Actinic keratosis is a skin condition that  sometimes becomes squamous cell carcinoma. Melanoma is less common than basal cell carcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma. It is more likely to invade nearby tissues and spread to other parts of the body. This summary is about  basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, and actinic keratosis. Anything that increases a person's chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Not every person with one or more of these risk factors will develop skin cancer, and it will develop in people who don't have any known risk factors. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Risk factors for  basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin include the following: Being exposed  to natural sunlight or artificial sunlight (such as from tanning beds) over long periods of time. Having a fair complexion, which includes the following:

Fair skin that freckles and burns easily, does not tan, or tans poorly. 
Blue, green, or other light-colored eyes.
Red or blond hair.Although having a fair complexion is a risk factor for skin cancer, people of all skin colors can get skin cancer. Having a history of sunburns. Having a personal or family history of basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, actinic keratosis,  familial dysplastic nevus syndrome, or unusual moles. Having certain changes in the genes or hereditary syndromes, such as basal cell nevus syndrome, that are linked to skin cancer. Having skin inflammation that has lasted for long periods of time. Having a weakened immune system. Being exposed to arsenic. Past treatment with radiation. Fair skin that freckles and burns easily, does not tan, or tans poorly. Blue, green, or other light-colored eyes. Red or blond hair. Although having a fair complexion is a risk factor for skin cancer, people of all skin colors can get skin cancer. Older age is the main risk factor for most cancers. The chance of getting cancer increases as you get older. Not all changes in the skin are a sign of basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, or actinic keratosis. Check with your doctor if you notice any changes in your skin. Signs of basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin include the following: A sore that does not heal. Areas of the skin that are:Raised, smooth, shiny, and look pearly. 
Firm and look like a scar, and may be white, yellow, or waxy.Raised and red or reddish-brown.
Scaly, bleeding, or crusty. Raised, smooth, shiny, and look pearly. Firm and look like a scar, and may be white, yellow, or waxy. Raised and red or reddish-brown. Scaly, bleeding, or crusty. Basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin occur most often in areas of the skin exposed to the sun, such as the nose, ears, lower lip, or top of the hands. Signs of actinic keratosis include the following: A rough,  red, pink, or brown, scaly patch on the skin that may be flat or raised. Cracking or peeling of the lower lip that is not helped by lip balm or petroleum jelly. Actinic keratosis occurs most commonly on the face or the top of the hands. In addition to asking about your personal and family health history and doing a physical exam, your doctor may perform the following tests and procedures: Skin exam: An exam of the skin  for     bumps or spots that look abnormal   in color, size, shape, or texture. Skin biopsy: All or part of  the abnormal-looking growth is cut from the skin and  viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. There are four main types of skin biopsies:Shave biopsy:  A sterile razor blade is used to “shave-off” the abnormal-looking growth.Punch biopsy: A special instrument called a punch or a trephine is used to remove a circle of tissue from the abnormal-looking growth.EnlargePunch biopsy. A sharp, hollow, circular instrument is used to remove a small, round piece of tissue from a lesion on the skin. The instrument is turned clockwise and counterclockwise to cut about 4 millimeters (mm) down to the layer of fatty tissue below the skin and remove the sample of tissue. Skin thickness is different on different parts of the body. Incisional biopsy: A scalpel is used to remove part of a growth.Excisional biopsy: A scalpel is used to remove the entire growth. Shave biopsy:  A sterile razor blade is used to “shave-off” the abnormal-looking growth. Punch biopsy: A special instrument called a punch or a trephine is used to remove a circle of tissue from the abnormal-looking growth.EnlargePunch biopsy. A sharp, hollow, circular instrument is used to remove a small, round piece of tissue from a lesion on the skin. The instrument is turned clockwise and counterclockwise to cut about 4 millimeters (mm) down to the layer of fatty tissue below the skin and remove the sample of tissue. Skin thickness is different on different parts of the body. Incisional biopsy: A scalpel is used to remove part of a growth. Excisional biopsy: A scalpel is used to remove the entire growth. The prognosis for squamous cell carcinoma of the skin depends mostly on the following: Stage of the cancer. Whether the patient is immunosuppressed. Whether the patient uses tobacco. The patient's general health. Treatment options for basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin depend on the following: The type of cancer. The stage of the cancer, for squamous cell carcinoma. The size of the tumor and what part of the body it affects. The patient’s general health. After squamous cell cancer of the skin has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out
		  if cancer cells have spread within the skin or to other parts of the body. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. Staging for basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin depends on where the cancer formed. The following stages are used for basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin that is on the head or neck but not on the eyelid:Stage 0 (Carcinoma in situ)Stage IStage IIStage IIIStage IV The following stages are used for basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin on the eyelid:Stage 0 (Carcinoma in situ)Stage IStage IIStage IIIStage IV Treatment depends on the type of skin cancer  or other skin condition diagnosed:Basal cell carcinomaSquamous cell carcinomaActinic keratosis Stage 0 (Carcinoma in situ) Stage I Stage II Stage III Stage IV Stage 0 (Carcinoma in situ) Stage I Stage II Stage III Stage IV Basal cell carcinoma Squamous cell carcinoma Actinic keratosis The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the skin or
		  to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the
		  staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know
		  the stage in order to plan treatment for squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Basal cell carcinoma of the skin rarely spreads to other parts of the body. Staging tests to check whether basal cell carcinoma of the skin has spread are usually not needed. The following tests and procedures may be used in the staging process for squamous cell carcinoma of the skin: CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the head, neck, and chest, taken from different angles.  The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.  This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. Chest x-ray: An x-ray of the organs and bones inside the chest.  An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. PET scan (positron emission tomography scan): A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body.  A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein.  The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body.  Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. Sometimes a PET scan and CT scan are done at the same time. Ultrasound exam: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues, such as lymph nodes, or organs and make echoes.  The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. The picture can be printed to be looked at later. An ultrasound exam of the regional lymph nodes may be done for basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Eye exam with dilated pupil: An exam of the eye in which the pupil is dilated (opened wider) with medicated eye drops to allow the doctor to look through the lens and pupil to the retina and optic nerve. The inside of the eye, including the retina and the optic nerve, is examined with a light. Lymph node biopsy: The removal of all or part of a lymph node. A pathologist views the lymph node tissue under a microscope to check for cancer cells. A lymph node biopsy may  be done for squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if  skin cancer spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually skin cancer cells. The disease is metastatic skin cancer, not lung cancer. Staging for basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the eyelid is different from staging for basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma found on other areas of the head or neck. There is no staging system for basal cell carcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma that is not found on the head or neck. Surgery to remove the primary tumor and abnormal lymph nodes is done so that tissue samples can be studied under a microscope. This is called pathologic staging and the findings are used for staging as described below. If staging is done before surgery to remove the tumor, it is called clinical staging. The clinical stage may be different from the pathologic stage. In stage 0, abnormal cells are found in the squamous cell or basal cell layer of the epidermis. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue. Stage 0 is also called carcinoma in situ.EnlargeNonmelanoma skin cancer of the head and neck (carcinoma in situ). Abnormal cells are found in the squamous cell or basal cell layer of the epidermis. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue. In stage I, cancer has formed and the tumor is 2 centimeters or smaller.EnlargeStage I nonmelanoma skin cancer of the head and neck. The tumor is 2 centimeters or smaller. In stage II, the tumor is larger than 2 centimeters but not larger than 4 centimeters.EnlargeStage II nonmelanoma skin cancer of the head and neck. The tumor is larger than 2 centimeters but not larger than 4 centimeters. or In stage III, one of the following is found: the tumor is larger than 4 centimeters, or cancer has spread to tissue covering the nerves below the dermis, or has spread below the subcutaneous tissue, or has spread to the bone and the bone has minor damage. Cancer may have also spread to one lymph node on the same side of the body as the tumor and the node is 3 centimeters or smaller, and cancer has not spread through to the outside covering of the lymph node; or the tumor is 4 centimeters or smaller. Cancer has spread to one lymph node on the same side of the body as the tumor and the node is 3 centimeters or smaller. or or In stage IV, one of the following is found: the tumor is any size and cancer may have spread to the bone and the bone has minor damage, or to tissue covering the nerves below the dermis, or below the subcutaneous tissue. Cancer has spread to the lymph nodes as follows:one lymph node on the same side of the body as the tumor, the affected node is 3 centimeters or smaller, and cancer has spread through to the outside covering of the lymph node; orone lymph node on the same side of the body as the tumor, the affected node is larger than 3 centimeters but not larger than 6 centimeters, and cancer has not spread through to the outside covering of the lymph node; ormore than one lymph node on the same side of the body as the tumor, the affected nodes are 6 centimeters or smaller, and cancer has not spread through to the outside covering of the lymph nodes; orone or more lymph nodes on the opposite side of the body as the tumor or on both sides of the body, the affected nodes are 6 centimeters or smaller, and cancer has not spread through to the outside covering of the lymph nodes. the tumor is any size and cancer may have spread to tissue covering the nerves below the dermis, or below the subcutaneous tissue, or to bone marrow or to bone, including the bottom of the skull. Also:cancer has spread to one lymph node that is larger than 6 centimeters and cancer has not spread through to the outside covering of the lymph node; orcancer has spread to one lymph node on the same side of the body as the tumor, the affected node is larger than 3 centimeters, and cancer has spread through to the outside covering of the lymph node; orcancer has spread to one lymph node on the opposite side of the body as the tumor, the affected node is any size, and cancer has spread through to the outside covering of the lymph node; orcancer has spread to more than one lymph node on one or both sides of the body and cancer has spread through to the outside covering of the lymph nodes. the tumor is any size and cancer has spread to bone marrow or to bone, including the bottom of the skull, and the bone has been damaged. Cancer may have also spread to the lymph nodes; or cancer has spread to other parts of the body, such as the lung. one lymph node on the same side of the body as the tumor, the affected node is 3 centimeters or smaller, and cancer has spread through to the outside covering of the lymph node; or one lymph node on the same side of the body as the tumor, the affected node is larger than 3 centimeters but not larger than 6 centimeters, and cancer has not spread through to the outside covering of the lymph node; or more than one lymph node on the same side of the body as the tumor, the affected nodes are 6 centimeters or smaller, and cancer has not spread through to the outside covering of the lymph nodes; or one or more lymph nodes on the opposite side of the body as the tumor or on both sides of the body, the affected nodes are 6 centimeters or smaller, and cancer has not spread through to the outside covering of the lymph nodes. cancer has spread to one lymph node that is larger than 6 centimeters and cancer has not spread through to the outside covering of the lymph node; or cancer has spread to one lymph node on the same side of the body as the tumor, the affected node is larger than 3 centimeters, and cancer has spread through to the outside covering of the lymph node; or cancer has spread to one lymph node on the opposite side of the body as the tumor, the affected node is any size, and cancer has spread through to the outside covering of the lymph node; or cancer has spread to more than one lymph node on one or both sides of the body and cancer has spread through to the outside covering of the lymph nodes. In stage 0, abnormal cells are found in the epidermis, usually in the basal cell layer. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue. Stage 0 is also called carcinoma in situ. In stage I, cancer has formed. Stage I is divided into stages IA and IB. Stage IA: The tumor is 10 millimeters or smaller and may have spread to the edge of the eyelid where the lashes are, to the connective tissue in the eyelid, or to the full thickness of the eyelid. Stage IB: The tumor is larger than 10 millimeters but not larger than 20 millimeters and the tumor has not spread to the edge of the eyelid where the lashes are, or to the connective tissue in the eyelid. Stage II is divided into stages IIA and IIB. In stage IIA, one of the following is found:the tumor is larger than 10 millimeters but not larger than 20 millimeters and has spread to the edge of the eyelid where the lashes are, to the connective tissue in the eyelid, or to the full thickness of the eyelid; orthe tumor is larger than 20 millimeters but not larger than 30 millimeters and may have spread to the edge of the eyelid where the lashes are, to the connective tissue in the eyelid, or to the full thickness of the eyelid. In stage IIB, the tumor may be any size and has spread to the eye, eye socket, sinuses, tear ducts, or brain, or to the tissues that support the eye. the tumor is larger than 10 millimeters but not larger than 20 millimeters and has spread to the edge of the eyelid where the lashes are, to the connective tissue in the eyelid, or to the full thickness of the eyelid; or the tumor is larger than 20 millimeters but not larger than 30 millimeters and may have spread to the edge of the eyelid where the lashes are, to the connective tissue in the eyelid, or to the full thickness of the eyelid. Stage III is divided into stages IIIA and IIIB. Stage IIIA: The tumor may be any size and may have spread to the edge of the eyelid where the lashes are, to the connective tissue in the eyelid, or to the full thickness of the eyelid, or to the eye, eye socket, sinuses, tear ducts, or brain, or to the tissues that support the eye. Cancer has spread to one lymph node on the same side of the body as the tumor and the node is 3 centimeters or smaller. Stage IIIB: The tumor may be any size and may have spread to the edge of the eyelid where the lashes are, to the connective tissue in the eyelid, or to the full thickness of the eyelid, or to the eye, eye socket, sinuses, tear ducts, or brain, or to the tissues that support the eye. Cancer has spread to lymph nodes as follows:one lymph node on the same side of the body as the tumor and the node is larger than 3 centimeters; ormore than one lymph node on the opposite side of the body as the tumor or on both sides of the body. one lymph node on the same side of the body as the tumor and the node is larger than 3 centimeters; or more than one lymph node on the opposite side of the body as the tumor or on both sides of the body. In stage IV, the tumor has spread to other parts of the body, such as the lung or liver. Basal cell carcinoma is the most common type of skin cancer. It usually occurs on areas of the skin that have been in the sun, most often the nose. Often this cancer appears as a raised bump that looks smooth and pearly. A less common type looks like a scar or it  is flat and firm and may be skin-colored, yellow, or waxy. Basal cell carcinoma may spread to tissues around the cancer, but it usually does not spread to other parts of the body. Squamous cell carcinoma  occurs on areas of the skin that have been damaged by the sun,  such as the   ears,  lower lip, and the back of the hands. Squamous cell carcinoma may also appear on areas of the skin that have been sunburned or exposed to chemicals or  radiation. Often this cancer looks like a firm red bump. The tumor may feel scaly, bleed, or form a crust. Squamous cell tumors may spread to  nearby lymph nodes. Squamous cell carcinoma that has not spread can usually be  cured. Actinic keratosis is a skin condition that is not cancer, but  sometimes changes into  squamous cell carcinoma.  One or more lesions may occur in areas that have been exposed to the sun, such as the face, the back of the hands, and the lower lip. It looks like rough, red, pink, or brown scaly patches on the skin that may be flat or raised, or as a cracked and peeling lower lip that is not helped by lip balm or petroleum jelly. Actinic keratosis may disappear without treatment. There are different types of treatment for patients with basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma of the skin,
		  and actinic keratosis. The following types of treatment are used:Surgery Radiation therapy
			 Chemotherapy Photodynamic therapyImmunotherapyTargeted therapyChemical peelOther drug therapy New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Treatment for skin cancer may cause side effects. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Follow-up tests may be needed. Surgery Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Photodynamic therapy Immunotherapy Targeted therapy Chemical peel Other drug therapy Different types of treatment are available for patients with basal cell carcinoma,  squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, and actinic keratosis. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some
		  are being tested in clinical trials.
		   A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help
		  improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients
		  with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the
		  standard treatment, the new
		  treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. One or more of the following surgical procedures may be used to treat basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, or actinic keratosis: Simple excision: The  tumor, along with some of the normal tissue around it, is cut from the skin. Mohs micrographic surgery:  The  tumor is cut from the skin  in thin layers. During the procedure, the edges of the tumor  and each layer of tumor removed are  viewed through a microscope to check for cancer cells. Layers continue to be  removed until no     more cancer cells are seen.  This type of surgery removes as little normal tissue as possible. It   is often used to remove skin cancer on the face, fingers, or genitals and skin cancer that does not have a clear border.  EnlargeMohs surgery. A surgical procedure to remove skin cancer in several steps. First, a thin layer of cancerous tissue is removed. Then, a second thin layer of tissue is removed and viewed under a microscope to check for cancer cells. More layers are removed one at a time until the tissue viewed under a microscope shows no remaining cancer. This type of surgery is used to remove as little normal tissue as possible and is often used to remove skin cancer on the face. Shave excision: The abnormal area is shaved off the surface of the skin with a small blade. Curettage and electrodesiccation: The  tumor is cut from the skin with a curette (a sharp, spoon-shaped tool).  A needle-shaped electrode is then used to  treat the area with an electric current that stops the bleeding and destroys cancer cells that  remain around the edge of the wound. The process may be repeated one to three times during the surgery to remove all of the cancer. This type of treatment is also called electrosurgery. Cryosurgery: A treatment that uses an instrument to freeze and destroy abnormal tissue, such as carcinoma in situ. This type of treatment is also called cryotherapy.EnlargeCryosurgery. An instrument with a nozzle is used to spray liquid nitrogen or liquid carbon dioxide to freeze and destroy abnormal tissue. Laser surgery: A surgical procedure that uses a laser beam (a narrow beam of intense light) as a knife to make bloodless cuts in tissue or to remove a surface lesion such as a tumor. Dermabrasion: Removal of the top layer of skin using a rotating wheel or small particles to rub away skin cells. Simple excision, Mohs micrographic surgery, curettage and electrodesiccation, and cryosurgery are used to treat basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Laser surgery is rarely used to treat basal cell carcinoma. Simple excision, shave excision, curettage and desiccation, dermabrasion, and laser surgery are used to treat actinic keratosis. Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing.  External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the area of the body with cancer. External radiation therapy is used to treat basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. Chemotherapy for basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, and actinic keratosis  is usually topical (applied to the skin in a cream or lotion).  Topical fluorouracil (5-FU) is used to treat basal cell carcinoma. See  Drugs Approved for Basal Cell Carcinoma for more information. Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a cancer treatment that uses a drug and a certain type of light to kill cancer cells. A drug that is not active until it is exposed to light is injected into a vein or put on the skin. The drug collects more in cancer cells than in normal cells. For skin cancer, laser light is shined onto the skin and the drug becomes active and kills the cancer cells. Photodynamic therapy causes little damage to healthy tissue. Photodynamic therapy is also used to treat actinic keratoses. Immunotherapy is a treatment that uses the patient’s immune system to fight
		  cancer. Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost,
		  direct, or restore the body’s natural defenses against cancer. There are different types of immunotherapy used to treat skin cancer: Immune checkpoint inhibitors  block proteins called checkpoints that are made by some types of immune system cells, such as T cells, and some cancer cells.  PD-1 is a protein on the surface of T cells that helps keep the body’s immune responses in check. PD-L1 is a protein found on some types of cancer cells. When PD-1 attaches to PD-L1, it stops the T cell from killing the cancer cell. PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibitors keep PD-1 and PD-L1 proteins from attaching to each other. This allows the T cells to kill cancer cells.Cemiplimab and pembrolizumab are types of PD-1 inhibitors used to treat  squamous cell carcinoma of the skin that is locally advanced or has spread to other parts of the body.EnlargeImmune checkpoint inhibitor. Checkpoint proteins, such as PD-L1 on tumor cells and PD-1 on T cells, help keep immune responses in check. The binding of PD-L1 to PD-1 keeps T cells from killing tumor cells in the body (left panel). Blocking the binding of PD-L1 to PD-1 with an immune checkpoint inhibitor (anti-PD-L1 or anti-PD-1) allows the T cells to kill tumor cells (right panel).Immunotherapy uses the body’s immune system to fight cancer. This animation explains one type of immunotherapy that uses immune checkpoint inhibitors to treat cancer. Cemiplimab and pembrolizumab are types of PD-1 inhibitors used to treat  squamous cell carcinoma of the skin that is locally advanced or has spread to other parts of the body. Interferon (by injection) may be used to treat squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Topical imiquimod therapy is an immune response modifier  that may be used to treat some basal cell carcinomas and is applied to the skin as a cream. See  Drugs Approved for Basal Cell Carcinoma for more information. Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells. Signal transduction inhibitor therapy: This treatment block signals that are passed from one molecule to another inside a cell. Blocking these signals may kill cancer cells. Vismodegib and sonidegib are signal transduction inhibitors used to treat basal cell carcinoma. See  Drugs Approved for Basal Cell Carcinoma for more information. A chemical peel is a procedure used to improve the way certain skin conditions look. A chemical solution is put on the skin to dissolve the top layers of skin cells. Chemical peels may be used to treat actinic keratosis. This type of treatment is also called chemabrasion and chemexfoliation. Retinoids (drugs related to vitamin A) are sometimes used to treat squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Diclofenac and ingenol  are topical drugs used to treat actinic keratosis. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, visit our Side Effects page. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer  treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first  to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. As you go through treatment, you  will have follow-up tests or checkups. Some tests that were done to diagnose or stage the cancer may be repeated to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). If basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma recur (come back), it is usually within 5 years of initial treatment. Talk to your doctor about how often you should have your skin checked for signs of cancer. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of basal cell carcinoma that is localized  may include the following: Simple excision. Mohs micrographic surgery. Radiation therapy. Curettage and electrodesiccation. Cryosurgery. Photodynamic therapy. Topical chemotherapy. Topical immunotherapy (imiquimod). Laser surgery (rarely used). Treatment of basal cell carcinoma that is metastatic or cannot be treated with local therapy may include the following: Targeted therapy with a signal transduction inhibitor (vismodegib or sonidegib). A clinical trial of a new treatment. Treatment of recurrent basal cell carcinoma that is not metastatic may include the following: Simple excision. Mohs micrographic surgery. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. Treatment of squamous cell carcinoma that is localized  may include the following: Simple excision. Mohs micrographic surgery. Radiation therapy. Curettage and electrodesiccation. Cryosurgery. Photodynamic therapy, for squamous cell carcinoma in situ (stage 0). Treatment of squamous cell carcinoma that is metastatic or cannot be treated with local therapy may include the following: Immunotherapy with cemiplimab or pembrolizumab. A clinical trial of  immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy. Treatment of recurrent squamous cell carcinoma that is not metastatic may include the following: Simple excision. Mohs micrographic surgery. Radiation therapy. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Actinic keratosis is not cancer but  is treated because it may develop into cancer. Treatment of actinic keratosis may include the following: Topical chemotherapy. Topical immunotherapy (imiquimod). Other drug therapy (diclofenac or ingenol). Chemical peel. Simple excision. Shave excision. Curettage and electrodesiccation. Dermabrasion. Photodynamic therapy. Laser surgery. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For more information from the National Cancer Institute about   skin     cancer, see the following: Skin Cancer (Including Melanoma) Home Page Skin Cancer Prevention Skin Cancer Screening Childhood Basal Cell Carcinoma and Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Skin Treatment Cryosurgery to Treat Cancer Lasers to Treat Cancer Drugs Approved for Basal Cell Carcinoma Photodynamic Therapy for Cancer Immunotherapy to Treat Cancer For general cancer information and other resources from the National Cancer Institute, visit: About Cancer Staging Chemotherapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Radiation Therapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Coping with Cancer Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer For Survivors and Caregivers Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish. PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the treatment of skin cancer.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board. A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Adult Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Skin Cancer Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/skin/patient/skin-treatment-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389265] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online. Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: TCGA - Data Types Collected - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/ccg/research/genome-sequencing/tcga/using-tcga-data/types
txt: The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) collected many types of data for each of over 20,000 tumor and normal samples. Each step in the Genome Characterization Pipeline generated numerous data points, such as: clinical information (e.g., smoking status)  molecular analyte metadata (e.g., sample portion weight)  molecular characterization data (e.g., gene expression values)  Below is supporting information and documentation for the different steps of molecular characterization. Documents on case enrollment, followup, and other forms related to the intake of samples and clinical data are available from the Biospecimen Core Resource. TCGA used a compendium of standard operating procedures for processing tissues and other biological samples into molecular analytes for molecular characterization. These protocols are available from NCI's Biospecimen Research Database. The data collected for a specific case in TCGA may have differed according to sample quality and quantity, cancer type, or technology available at the time of analysis. Below is a general summary of the types of clinical, molecular characterization, and other types of data that may have been generated for the different cancer types studied. Raw data (e.g. BAMs), germline and non-validated mutations, and genotypes are under controlled access (indicated in red). Derived data is available open access (exceptions are noted in table below). All data collected and processed by the program is available at the Genomic Data Commons (GDC), including TCGA publication supplemental and associated data files. Questions about locating or accessing data should be directed to the GDC support team. Resources for TCGA users and TCGA FAQs are available. Experimental protocols for each platform can be found in individual publications. Additional information in the Clinical Data Elements (CDE) Browser Additional information in the CDE Browser
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Antiperspirants/Deodorants and Breast Cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/myths/antiperspirants-fact-sheet
txt:  Is there a link between antiperspirants or deodorants and breast cancer?  What is known about the ingredients in antiperspirants and deodorants?  What is known about the relationship between antiperspirants or deodorants and breast cancer?  Where can someone get more information on breast cancer risk?  Is there a link between antiperspirants or deodorants and breast cancer? What is known about the ingredients in antiperspirants and deodorants? What is known about the relationship between antiperspirants or deodorants and breast cancer? Where can someone get more information on breast cancer risk? Is there a link between antiperspirants or deodorants and breast cancer? Because underarm antiperspirants or deodorants are applied near the breast and contain potentially harmful ingredients, several scientists and others have suggested a possible connection between their use and breast cancer (1, 2). However, no scientific evidence links the use of these products to the development of breast cancer. What is known about the ingredients in antiperspirants and deodorants? Aluminum-based compounds are used as the active ingredient in antiperspirants. These compounds form a temporary “plug” within the sweat duct that stops the flow of sweat to the skin's surface. Some research suggests that aluminum-containing underarm antiperspirants, which are applied frequently and left on the skin near the breast, may be absorbed by the skin and have estrogen-like (hormonal) effects (3). Because estrogen can promote the growth of breast cancer cells, some scientists have suggested that the aluminum-based compounds in antiperspirants may contribute to the development of breast cancer (3). In addition, it has been suggested that aluminum may have direct activity in breast tissue (4). However, no studies to date have confirmed any substantial adverse effects of aluminum that could contribute to increased breast cancer risks. A 2014 review concluded there was no clear evidence showing that the use of aluminum-containing underarm antiperspirants or cosmetics increases the risk of breast cancer (5). Some research has focused on parabens, which are preservatives used in some deodorants and antiperspirants that have been shown to mimic the activity of estrogen in the body’s cells (6). It has been reported that parabens are found in breast tumors, but there is no evidence that they cause breast cancer. Although parabens are used in many cosmetic, food, and pharmaceutical products, most deodorants and antiperspirants in the United States do not currently contain parabens. What is known about the relationship between antiperspirants or deodorants and breast cancer? Only a few studies have investigated a possible relationship between breast cancer and underarm antiperspirants/deodorants. One study, published in 2002, did not show any increase in risk for breast cancer among women who reported using an underarm antiperspirant or deodorant (7). The results also showed no increase in breast cancer risk among women who reported using a blade (nonelectric) razor and an underarm antiperspirant or deodorant, or among women who reported using an underarm antiperspirant or deodorant within 1 hour of shaving with a blade razor. These conclusions were based on interviews with 813 women with breast cancer and 793 women with no history of breast cancer. A subsequent study, published in 2006, also found no association between antiperspirant use and breast cancer risk, although it included only 54 women with breast cancer and 50 women without breast cancer (8). A 2003 retrospective cohort study examining the frequency of underarm shaving and antiperspirant/deodorant use among 437 breast cancer survivors (2) reported younger age at breast cancer diagnosis for women who used antiperspirants/deodorants frequently or who started using them together with shaving at an earlier age. Because of the retrospective nature of the study, the results are not conclusive. Because studies of antiperspirants and deodorants and breast cancer have provided conflicting results, additional research would be needed to determine whether a relationship exists (9). Where can someone get more information on breast cancer risk? People who are concerned about their breast cancer risk are encouraged to talk with their doctor. Information about risk factors for breast cancer is available through NCI’s Cancer Information Service at 1–800–4–CANCER (1–800–422–6237).
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Dabrafenib Plus Trametinib for Advanced Melanoma - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/skin/research/dabrafenib-trametinib
txt: In two phase III trials, patients with metastatic melanoma whose tumors have specific mutations in the BRAF gene lived longer following treatment with dabrafenib (Tafinlar®), a BRAF inhibitor, plus trametinib (Mekinist®), a MEK inhibitor, than following treatment with a BRAF inhibitor alone. The results of both trials were published in November 2014 in the New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM). In previous clinical trials, both dabrafenib and another BRAF inhibitor, vemurafenib (Zelboraf®), improved progression-free survival when used alone to treat patients with advanced melanoma whose tumors bear specific mutations in the BRAF gene. These mutations, which affect an amino acid in the BRAF protein (V600), cause strong growth-promoting signals and are often found in advanced melanomas. Unfortunately, tumors frequently develop resistance to BRAF inhibitors within 6 to7 months. Studies have shown that resistance develops, at least in part, because tumors are able to activate the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP kinase/MEK) signaling pathway, which allows the tumors to resume growing. By combining dabrafenib with trametinib, a drug that inhibits the activity of MEK proteins, researchers hope to prevent tumors from using this escape mechanism. In the larger of the two trials, led by Caroline Robert, M.D., Ph.D., of the Institut Gustave Roussy, 704 patients with metastatic melanoma bearing a BRAF V600 mutation were  randomly assigned to receive either a combination of dabrafenib plus trametinib or vemurafenib alone. Patients in the combination-therapy group had a 12-month survival rate of 72 percent, compared with 65 percent in the vemurafenib group. The dabrafenib-trametinib group also had a better median progression-free survival than the vemurafenib group: 11.4 months versus 7.3 months, respectively. Five patients (1 percent) who received dabrafenib plus trametinib developed cutaneous squamous-cell carcinoma—a serious and common complication in patients treated with BRAF inhibitors—compared with 63 of the patients (18 percent) who received vemurafenib alone. The most common adverse events in this trial were pyrexia (fever), fatigue, nausea, headaches, and chills. The proportion of patients in the combination group discontinuing treatment due to adverse events was similar to that of the vemurafenib group (13 percent versus 12 percent). In a separate trial, led by Georgina V. Long, M.D., Ph.D., of the Melanoma Institute Australia, 423 previously untreated patients with advanced melanoma were randomly assigned to receive either a combination of dabrafenib plus trametinib daily or dabrafenib plus placebo. Patients in the combination-therapy group had an overall response rate of 67 percent and a 6-month survival rate of 93 percent, whereas patients in the dabrafenib and placebo group had a 51 percent response rate and 6-month survival rate of 85 percent. Median progression-free survival was longer in the combination group than the dabrafenib group: 9.3 months versus 8.8 months, respectively. [See the update below for results on overall survival.] Five patients in the trial who received dabrafenib plus trametinib (2 percent) developed cutaneous squamous-cell carcinoma, compared with 20 of the patients who received dabrafenib alone (9 percent). The most common adverse events were similar to those observed in the larger trial and contributed to the discontinuation of treatment by 9 percent of patients in the combination group versus 5 percent in the dabrafenib and placebo group. Both trials were funded by GlaxoSmithKline, the manufacturer of dabrafenib and trametinib. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved both drugs in 2013 for use as single agents in patients with BRAF mutation-positive melanomas, and the FDA approved the dabrafenib-trametinib combination in 2014. Data from clinical trials that have tested a BRAF and MEK inhibitor in combination have convincingly shown that “the combination of a BRAF and MEK inhibitor is better than either drug alone, and safer with regard to the risk of cutaneous squamous carcinoma,” said Howard Streicher, M.D., of NCI’s Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program. The impact of these trials on patient outcomes could be important, suggested Brendan Curti, M.D., of the Providence Cancer Center, in an accompanying editorial in NEJM. “The good news is that we now have agents with a much higher potential to induce clinically meaningful melanoma regression, as compared with therapies used before,” Dr. Curti wrote. However, since melanoma adapts and develops drug resistance very quickly, Dr. Curti cautioned that more work remains to be done to develop therapeutic strategies that are better able to address treatment resistance.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NIH Fellows Editorial Process Guidelines - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/grants-training/training/resources-trainees/get-involved/editorial-board/editorial-process
txt: Three primary editors volunteer (or are assigned) per submitted document. New members will serve as a fourth primary editor on the first submission they volunteer to edit, which should be within the first six weeks of their membership. Full membership is only granted to members who volunteer. The primary editors serve as the main editors for the document and are responsible for creating the electronic and soft copy final reports for the author. These reports are due to the Senior Editor, in their final form, 7 days after the manuscript is submitted to FEB so that the Senior Editor can verify that the content of both reports agree and have them delivered to the author 10 days after submission. The primary editors of each paper will be in charge of leading the discussion of the document at the next FEB meeting. This is meant to be a productive discussion to help the primary editors come up with a consensus as to what needs to be addressed in the report. All members of the board are encouraged to give their comments. It is recommended that all primary editors take notes during the discussion so that it will be easier to incorporate all the comments in either the soft copy or electronic reports. One primary editor must volunteer to compile the soft copy and another must volunteer to compile the electronic report. The soft copy has many, but not necessarily all, of the edits of each primary editor compiled on a copy of the manuscript. All the edits would make it too messy and overwhelming for the author. For instance, if something needs to be in past tense, the first few instances should be corrected followed by a notation in the margin alerting the author that they need to change the tense accordingly for the rest of the document. If some sections are particularly confusing - i.e., a suggestion to combine parts of two sentences and move them to a different place in the paragraph - they can be included on the electronic copy to make it clearer. The electronic report is a typed document containing the various suggestions made by the editors. To facilitate the creation of this report, all the primary editors must create their own electronic report that can be emailed to the person compiling the final electronic report. The format used for the electronic report should contain the headings with comments under each: General Comments, Title, Abstract, Introduction, Materials and Methods, Results, Discussion, Figures, Figure Legends, and Acknowledgements. The final electronic report is then emailed to the Senior Editor. It should also be in as "final" a format as possible without the need for significant additional editing by the Senior Editor. Please use the template provided. The Senior Editor will compare the soft copy with the electronic copy to verify that the two agree. The final reports will then be sent to the author by e-mail. NOTE: All members are asked to read all documents submitted, regardless if they are the primary editor for the document or not. This helps generate discussion during the meetings and also provides everyone with additional training and practice. NIH Fellows Editorial Board Final Report Author, I. et al., Title General comments: May start with a very brief (1-2) sentence summary of the manuscript followed with general comments that speak to the whole document as a whole. Remember to start with praise and point out what the author did well before the inevitable "however" statement. The format for this and the other sections of the compiled electronic report can be in paragraph form or in paragraph form followed by bulleted or enumerated comments. Whatever you feel will make it easier for the author to understand. The final report should be a compilation of the electronic comments of the other primary editors as well as any verbal comments brought up in the discussion of the manuscript. Please compile these into a professional and complete document void of grammatical and spelling errors. Please do not simply cut and paste the comments of the other primary editors. Title: Abstract: The abstract is an extremely important part of any manuscript. It not only serves to summarize the key findings of a paper, but also acts as the main "advertisement" to get others to read it. In general, the reader should be able to clearly pick out the background, purpose, methods, results and conclusions. Include other specific comments. Introduction: Include any specific comments. i.e. The introduction of manuscript usually goes from general background information to the specific problem addressed. Results: Include any specific comments. i.e. The results should always be in past tense. Experimental Procedures: Include any specific comments. i.e. The city and state should be provided for all manufacturers. Discussion: Include any specific comments. i.e. The Discussion of a manuscript should discuss the results and not simply restate them. Figures: Include any specific comments. i.e. The axes of all graphs should be clearly marked. Legends: Include any specific comments. i.e. The axes of all graphs should be clearly marked. Acknowledgements: Include any specific comments. i.e. Please acknowledge the NIH Fellows Editorial Board.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Drug combination may be highly effective in recurrent ovarian cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2014/ovariannct01116648asco
txt:  Posted:
May 31, 2014  240-760-6600 Significant improvement with the use of a combination drug therapy for recurrent ovarian cancer was reported at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) meeting in Chicago today (late breaking abstract #5500). This is the first ovarian cancer study to use a combination of drugs that could be taken orally. The drugs were tested in a phase I combination study followed by a randomized phase 2 trial sponsored by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), part of the National Institutes of Health. The trial compared the activity of a combination of the drug olaparib (which blocks DNA repair) and the blood vessel inhibitor drug cediranib, vs. olaparib alone. Trial results showed a near doubling of progression-free survival benefit (the length of time during and after treatment that the cancer did not get worse) for the combination therapy over use of the single drug alone. “The findings of this study are exciting because they support the idea that combining these two targeted oral therapies results in significant activity in ovarian cancer, more so than olaparib alone,” said Joyce Liu, M.D., M.P.H., the lead investigator and medical oncologist at the Susan F. Smith Center for Women's Cancers at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston. “We are looking forward to further exploring this combination in ovarian cancer and potentially increasing effective treatment options for our patients with this cancer.” Over 22,000 cases of ovarian cancer are diagnosed annually in the United States. Seventy-five percent of the cancers are classified as high-grade serous type, the women have more advanced disease at diagnosis, and their tumors are more aggressive. Of this high-grade type, about three-quarters of patients respond to initial treatment but nearly all will recur and need follow-up treatment. That treatment will be based on how the cancers have responded to previous therapies and are broken down into two categories based on patients’ responses to chemotherapy regimens that include platinum: Platinum-Sensitive – these are patients most likely to benefit from Poly ADP-Ribose Polymerase (PARP) inhibition.  PARP inhibitors, such as olaparib, are targeted drugs that block an enzyme involved in many functions in the cell, including the repair of DNA damage.  Platinum-Resistant – these are patients whose disease recurred within six months of completion of conventional chemotherapy (using the drugs cisplatin or carboplatin) and are generally less responsive to subsequent treatments and have not responded as well to PARP inhibitors.  They are currently treated with non-platinum chemotherapy, single-agents, with or without addition of the blood vessel inhibitor drug called bevacizumab.  An anti-angiogenic agent, or blood vessel inhibitor called cediranib (which inhibits a protein known as VEGFR) and olaparib, a PARP inhibitor, are each clinically active in recurrent ovarian cancer. Preclinical laboratory studies suggest these agents add to and enhance the activity of each other, and an early phase 1 study showed that the combination of cediranib and olaparib was well-tolerated with minimal side effects. For this reason, 90 patients from nine centers were randomly assigned to one of two study arms for the phase II clinical trial: the first taking capsules of olaparib (400 milligrams [mg] twice daily) and the other taking a combination of the two drugs (200 mg olaparib in capsule form twice daily and 30 mg of cediranib by tablets once daily). The study arms were stratified by BRCA gene mutation status and receipt of prior anti-angiogenic therapy. The BRCA gene is one of the most commonly mutated genes in breast cancer. Patients, whose median age was 58, were enrolled from October 2011 to June 2013.  As of March 2014, median progression-free survival was 9.2 months for olaparib and 17.7 months for the combination therapy, which is a significant advantage. The overall rate of toxicity was higher for patients on the combination therapy. Fatigue, diarrhea, and hypertension were the most common toxic effects, all of which were manageable. “Of particular note is the fact that both drugs used in this trial are in pill form and could offer an alternative to intravenous chemotherapy,” said Percy Ivy, M.D., associate chief of NCI’s Investigational Drug Branch.  “Therefore, this combination therapy could be used anywhere in the world where patients can be safely monitored for the side-effects of olaparib and cediranib, such as diarrhea and hypertension.” Based on these results, two phase 3 trials are being planned for platinum-sensitive and platinum-resistant ovarian cancer patients by one of NCI’s new National Cancer Trial Network Groups, the NRG Oncology Group (formerly 3 cooperative groups: the  National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP), the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG), and the Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG). This trial was funded by NCI and received supplementary funds from the Recovery Act. ### Reference: Liu, JF, et al. A randomized phase 2 trial comparing efficacy of the combination of the PARP inhibitor olaparib and the anti-angiogenic cediranib against olaparib alone in recurrent platinum-sensitive ovarian cancer. NCT 01116648.  ASCO late breaking abstract #5500. http://www.cancer.gov/clinicaltrials/NCT01116648 The National Cancer Institute (NCI) leads the National Cancer Program and the NIH effort to dramatically reduce the prevalence of cancer and improve the lives of cancer patients and their families, through research into prevention and cancer biology, the development of new interventions, and the training and mentoring of new researchers. For more information about cancer, please visit the NCI website at http://www.cancer.gov or call NCI's Cancer Information Service at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit http://www.nih.gov. Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, a principal teaching affiliate of Harvard Medical School, is world-renowned for its leadership in adult and pediatric cancer treatment and research. Designated as a comprehensive cancer center by the National Cancer Institute, it is one of the largest recipients among independent hospitals of NCI and National Institutes of Health grant funding. For more information, go to www.dana-farber.org.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Lung Cancer—Patient Version - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/lung
txt: Lung cancer includes two main types: non-small cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer. Smoking causes most lung cancers, but nonsmokers can also develop lung cancer. Explore the links on this page to learn more about lung cancer treatment, prevention, screening, statistics, research, clinical trials, and more.  Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Treatment  Small Cell Lung Cancer Treatment  Childhood Pleuropulmonary Blastoma Treatment  Childhood Tracheobronchial Tumors Treatment   Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer (PDQ®)  Drugs Approved for Lung Cancer  Clinical Trials to Treat Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer  Clinical Trials to Treat Small Cell Lung Cancer   Lung Cancer Prevention   Cancer-Causing Substances in the Environment  Smokefree.gov  Tobacco  Clinical Trials to Prevent Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer  Clinical Trials to Prevent Small Cell Lung Cancer   Lung Cancer Screening   National Lung Screening Trial Patient and Physician Guide

pdf file

(39 KB)  Clinical Trials to Screen for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer  Clinical Trials to Screen for Small Cell Lung Cancer  The information in this section is meant to help you cope with the many issues and concerns that occur when you have cancer.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Missed Opportunities for Supportive Care across the Cancer Care Continuum in Malawi: Perspectives fr - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/cgh/events/25thawsp-survivorship
txt: January 25, 2022
                                            |
                        2:00 PM
                        –
                        3:00 PM Virtual Webinar Add to Outlook Calendar Register for this virtual webinar. Stephen Kimani, M.D., M.Sc., Assistant Professor, Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Huntsman Cancer Institute at the University of Utah will present at the January session of the NCI Division of Cancer Control and Population Sciences, Office of Cancer Survivorship Webinar Series, celebrating its 25th year. The talk will be of particular interest to those working in global health who focus on cancer care delivery and survivorship in low-resource settings and trainees and junior investigators in the field of academic global oncology. This session is sponsored in partnership with NCI's Center for Global Health.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Supporting the Cancer Research Workforce - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/nci-role/cancer-research-workforce
txt: NCI develops and supports a cadre of exceptional scientists from a variety of disciplines across the career continuum, from high school students just starting to explore a career path to well-established cancer investigators. Having a community of researchers from diverse backgrounds and at all levels of expertise strengthens cancer research and its translation to patient care. NCI offers a number of training opportunities at NCI offices and laboratories in Maryland (intramural) and funding mechanisms to support individuals and research teams (extramural) as they pursue new discoveries and technologies to overcome cancer. Scientists can apply for training, career development, and mentored research awards. NCI supports the training of students and early-career scientists, ranging from the high school level through the postdoctoral years and beyond. NCI fellowships are available in fields as diverse as cancer prevention, behavioral sciences, epidemiology, genetics, immunotherapy, and technology transfer. NCI promotes diversity in the cancer research workforce through several programs, including the Continuing Umbrella of Research Experiences (CURE) and Partnerships to Advance Cancer Health Equity (PACHE) programs. Read about data on the age and career stage of investigators and how the data have informed NCI programs and strategies to improve workforce diversity. Scientists embarking on independent careers can face challenges that impede their success and make it difficult to remain in research. To address this issue, NCI supports early-stage investigators (ESIs) in many ways. The Method to Extend Research in Time (MERIT) Award provides up to 7 years of support to certain investigators who have their first R01 grant compared with 5 years of support for the traditional R01 grant. The MERIT Award offers investigators more stability to launch their careers, enables creativity and innovation, and provides a longer amount of time during which they can apply to renew their current grant and/or apply for new grants. NCI is supporting more early-stage investigators than in the past with the goal of ensuring a robust pipeline of future cancer research leaders. NCI continues to support scientists who have an established record of productivity through a variety of funding mechanisms. A large portion of NCI’s budget funds investigator-initiated research proposals that have undergone a rigorous peer-review process. This funding, through the R01 and similar mechanisms (including the R23, R29, R37, DP2, and RF1), provides support to highly skilled scientists, working in their areas of expertise, who have submitted encouraging preliminary data. Much of the progress we have made against cancer to date had its origins in investigator-initiated research. The institute also provides support through collaborative funding mechanisms, such as the Translational Research Program’s Specialized Programs of Research Excellence (SPORE) grants and Cancer Moonshot funding. Most awards made from NCI’s research project grant pool are awarded to established investigators following a rigorous peer-review process. NCI gathers data and monitors trends on the age, gender, career stage, and race/ethnicity of the NCI-funded workforce. These data are used to identify factors that impede workforce diversity and inform the development of policies and programs to attract, support, and retain a diverse workforce. For example, an analysis of principal investigators from nine age groups applying for and receiving NCI R01 awards from fiscal year 1990 to fiscal year 2016 found that the NCI “R01 workforce” had expanded and aged over this time period. The aging of the R01 workforce reflected an increase in time between finishing a Ph.D. and applying for and receiving an R01, and a drop in retention of investigators beyond their first R01 award. Data of this type will help NCI identify ways to help scientists begin and sustain careers in the NCI R01 workforce. NCI is also committed to ending structural racism in biomedical research and making the cancer research community more equitable and inclusive. The research enterprise is strengthened when the intellect and talent of people with diverse perspectives, backgrounds, and skill sets are applied to complex biomedical problems. NCI initiated an equity and inclusion program to enhance the research we support and conduct in cancer disparities, ensure diversity of thought and background in the cancer research workforce, and promote an inclusive and equitable community within NCI. NCI will soon share initial results of an analysis on grant funding by gender, race, and ethnicity. The data collected will be used to develop informed strategies and approaches that sustain, invigorate, and diversify the cancer research workforce. These efforts advance NCI’s goal of maintaining a robust pipeline of cancer scientists to provide future leadership in basic, translational, and clinical research.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Director’s Innovation Award Past Recipients - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/grants-training/training/resources-trainees/career-planning/past-recipients
txt: The NCI Director’s Innovation Award Program is designed to support development of highly innovative approaches and technology aimed at significant cancer-related problems. Novel proposals with the potential for high impact, the potential to generate new intellectual property or technology, or which are considered too high-risk or preliminary to pursue within the base budget allocation are encouraged. Proposals with an emphasis on health disparities research are also encouraged. The program offers one-time awards Career Development Awards that are targeted to Postdoctoral Fellows, Staff Scientists, and Staff Clinicians at all levels, with an upper limit of $10,000. Christopher Bohrer, Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression General principles of enhancer-biology: building from scratch Nicolas Cuburu, Laboratory of Cellular Oncology Harnessing adaptive Natural Killer cells to treat solid tumors Sarah Dremel, HIV & AIDS Malignancy BranchSequence determines function: Molecular mechanisms of herpesvirus circRNAs Veer Keizer, Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression Magnetic manipulation of enhancer-promoter interaction Sierra Marker, Chemical Biology LaboratoryHarnessing transporter upregulation to create selective probes for HNSCC Sushant Patkar, Molecular Imaging BranchIdentifying imaging biomarkers of exceptional responses to cancer therapy Philippe Youkharibache, Cancer Data Science LaboratoryEngineering next generation CAR with a natively dimeric architecture Pradip Bajgain, Mouse Cancer Genetics Program
‘Self-driving’ CARs to target solid malignancies Siddharth Sai Matikonda, Chemical Biology Laboratory
Chemical Strategy to Achieve Efficient Targeted Delivery of PI3K Inhibitors Brajendra Tripathi, Laboratory of Cellular Oncology
Targeting mutant KRAS lung adenocarcinoma by reactivating tumor suppressor Syed Usama, Chemical Biology Laboratory
Investigating PDL1 as Novel Target for Fluorescence Guided Surgery in TNBC Wei Wu, Laboratory of Genome Integrity
Mechanism of cognitive dysfunction during chemotherapy Acong Yang, RNA Biology Laboratory
Cell-specific miRNA target mapping by RNA editing & single cell sequencing Qun Jiang, Thoracic and GI Malignancies Branch
Development of mesothelin-targeted CAR-NK cell therapy for solid tumors Nan Li, Laboratory of Molecular Biology
Design of novel CAR T cells based on integration sites by genome editing Zhihui Liu, Pediatric Oncology Branch
Hi-C-based identification of chromatin associated proteins and eRNAs Robin Sebastian, Developmental Therapeutics Branch
How DNA double-strand breaks affect the dynamics of mammalian replication Miranda Sowder, Pediatric Oncology Branch
Remodeling the tumor extracellular matrix using genetically engineered MSCs Shweta Tiwary, Vaccine Branch
Roles of pro-resolving lipids on augmenting cancer vaccine efficacy Daniel Arango, Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression
Detection of mRNA Decay Intermediates using Nanopore Sequencing Cristina Bergamaschi, Vaccine Branch
Development of circular mRNA expression vectors for cancer immunotherapy Xavier Bofill De Ros, RNA Biology Laboratory
Functional mapping of miRNA maturation defects via single cell sequencing H. Diego Folco, Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
High Throughput Screen for Small-Molecule Inhibitors of Gametogenesis James Kirui, Retroviral Replication Laboratory
Using highly sensitive reporter virus vectors to study late stages of HIV-1 Kerrie Marie, Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics
Single-cell sequencing of melanoblasts to uncover metastasis mechanisms Sounak Sahu, Mouse Cancer Genetics Program
A high-throughput screening platform to identify CRISPR-editing enhancers Sheryse Taylor, Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis
Integrative & comparative analysis of the immune response to tobacco smoke Jiangdong Chen, Laboratory of Molecular Biology
Mechanistic insight into an N-acetyltransferase regulating sRNA function Christina Fitzsimmons, Laboratory of Cell Biology
Linking fumarate and gene expression in renal cell carcinoma Berkley Gryder, Genetics Branch
Cruciform DNA Adds Critical Signal-Relay Decision Layer to Gene Control Stephanie Harmon, Molecular Imaging Program
Automated identification of adverse features on digital pathology and MRI Sri Krishna, Surgery Branch
Immune correlates of successful adoptive T-cell therapy Jyoti Roy, Molecular Imaging Program
Preservation of salivary gland function after PSMA radionuclide therapies Rushikesh Sable, Pediatric Oncology Branch
Precision targeting of M2-like tumor associated macrophages Varun Sood, Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression 
Investigating the determinants of enhancer-promoter interactions Yongjun Sui, Vaccine Branch 
Epigenetic programming of myeloid cells and trained immunity in HIV vaccine Yihan Wan, Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression
Orchestrated single-cell transcription dynamics during cell fate decision Tomer Cooks, Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis 
Precision medicine tools to identify cell-specificity of tumor exosomes Qiong Fu, Thoracic and Gastrointestinal Oncology Branch
Identifying novel function of platelets in NAFLD-promoted HCC development Chorong Han, Lymphoid Malignancies Branch
Zebrafish as a model for erythroid disorders caused by THRA gene mutations Bau-Lin Huang, Cancer and Developmental Biology Laboratory
Gene expression signatures of mouse embryo limb mesenchymal progenitors Joe Matarlo, Molecular Targets Laboratory
Natural Product Modulators of miR-21: Implications in Cancer Stem Cells Carla Neckles, Genetics Branch
Novel rG4 HNRNPH1-directed Aptamers as Splicing Modulators in Cancer Eva Perez Guijarro, Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics
In vivo CRISPR/Cas9 screening for novel targets for melanoma immunotherapy Leonid Serebryannyy, Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression 
Identify molecular pathways of micronuclei formation David Sturgill, Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression 
Base resolution mapping of acetylated cytidine in mRNA Leila Toulabi, Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis 
Mechanistic Investigation of DRD1 EGFR as a Novel Signaling Axis in Lung Cancer Scott Walsh, Chemical Biology Laboratory
Rebuilding T cells for Cancer Immunodeficiencies using the IL-7 Pathway Li Xia, Chemical Biology Laboratory
Engineer anti-carbohydrate antibody using multivalent display platform Acong Yang, Radiation Biology Branch
Identification of Target-Specific Small Molecule Inhibitors of miR-155 Fardokht Abulwerdi, Basic Research Laboratory
Triple helix-containing long noncoding RNA, MALAT1, as a therapeutic target Xavier Bofill De Ros, Gene Regulation and Chromosome Biology Laboratory
Design of a single tool for DNA editing and RNA interference David Calabrese, Chemical Biology Laboratory
Precise Control of MYC Transcription via Light Mediated Azobenzene Linkers Andres Canela, Laboratory of Genome Integrity
Physiological role of DNA breaks at neuronal promoters Jiandong Chen, Laboratory of Molecular Biology
Novel mechanism of sRNA regulation in bacteria Austin Duffy, Thoracic and GI Oncology Branch
Precision Immunotherapy for gastric cancer Ying Fu, Laboratory of Molecular Biology
Glypican-3 Specific Antibody Drug Conjugates for Hepatocellular Carcinoma Daniel Green, Womens Malignancies Branch
Generation of Continuous 3-D Cultures of Primary Ovarian Cancer Cells Maria Hernandez, Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis
Identification of viral-host signatures linked to early onset of HCC Nan Li, Laboratory of Molecular Biology
Glypican2 as a New Therapeutic Target in Neuroblastoma Helen Michael, Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics
Identification of genes involved in initiation and transformation of moles Carter Mitchell, Molecular Targets Laboratory
Anti-Cancer Proteins: A Novel Paradigm to Fight the Ancient Battle Colin Paul, Laboratory of Cell Biology
Intravital Characterization of Early Metastatic Colonization Vivek Shukla, Thoracic and GI Oncology Branch
Identification of Novel Targets for Lung Cancer Therapy Using an iPSC Model Dionysios Watson, Vaccine Branch
“Trojan macrophages” for tumor homing and local delivery of immunotherapy
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Developing the First Precision Immunotherapy - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/treatment/immunotherapy/pembrolizumab-first-precision-immunotherapy
txt: In May 2017, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the first drug to treat tumors based on their genetic characteristics, regardless of where in the body the cancer originated. Until now, drugs have been approved based on their cell or tissue of origin, such as the breast or the lung. But pembrolizumab (Keytruda®) doesn’t target the genetic abnormalities of cancer cells specifically—it targets the immune system. How did pembrolizumab become the first FDA-approved “tumor-agnostic” precision medicine drug? This historic accomplishment was enabled by more than three decades of NCI-funded research in cancer genetics and immunology. The drug is now available for patients with late-stage solid tumors with a genetic feature called microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) or mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR). Whereas precision medicine has focused largely on developing and testing drugs that target the genetic abnormalities that drive cancer cell growth, this new precision medicine approach uses the genetic information in tumors as a biomarker, not a target, to identify patients who may benefit from treatment with pembrolizumab. When the cells of the body divide, their DNA must be copied so each progeny cell receives a full complement. This process, known as DNA replication, is not always perfect and mistakes can be made. Normally, however, cells have ways of repairing these mistakes. In cells with dMMR, genes responsible for a DNA repair process known as mismatch repair are mutated. This DNA repair defect can be inherited (as it is in a condition called Lynch syndrome), or the defect can happen by chance (sporadically). The failure of cells with dMMR to repair mistakes made in DNA replication leads to the accumulation of hundreds to thousands of mutations, some of which can cause cancer. Lynch syndrome is named after NCI-funded researcher Henry T. Lynch, M.D., who discovered the syndrome in the early 1970s by studying affected families that demonstrated an increased risk of colorectal and several other types of cancer. In the 1990s, several NCI-funded research teams investigating the genetics of hereditary colorectal cancer determined that mutations in mismatch repair genes play a key role in this syndrome. Two of these teams were led by Richard Kolodner, Ph.D., of the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, and Bert Vogelstein, M.D., of Johns Hopkins University. In addition to hereditary and sporadic colorectal cancers, dMMR is associated with some cancers of the uterus, ovary, prostate, stomach, small intestine, biliary tract, and pancreas. Scientists have found that cancers with many mutations, such as lung cancer and melanoma, are more likely to respond to pembrolizumab and other immunotherapy drugs than cancers with low numbers of mutations. Researchers hypothesized that tumors with dMMR—because of their high number of mutations—might also respond to these drugs, including pembrolizumab. One trial, led by Johns Hopkins researcher Dung Thi Le, M.D., was funded in part by several NCI grants, including a Cancer Center Support Grant and a Specialized Program of Research Excellence Award. Forty-one patients were enrolled in this trial, 32 of whom had colorectal cancer. Forty percent of patients with dMMR colorectal cancer responded to treatment, compared with 0% in patients without the defect. These results and other data led FDA to grant pembrolizumab accelerated approval for the treatment of dMMR cancers. This approval is significant because targeting genetic characteristics, rather than where the cancer originates in the body, opens up new options for patients who might otherwise not be considered candidates for a drug. Furthermore, this example demonstrates that decades of NCI-funded research in different areas, including cancer genetics and immunology, has resulted in a whole greater than the sum of its parts for patients.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Small Intestine Cancer—Patient Version - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/small-intestine
txt: Small intestine cancer usually begins in an area of the intestine called the duodenum. This cancer is rarer than cancers in other parts of the gastrointestinal system, such as the colon and stomach. Explore the links on this page to learn more about small intestine cancer treatment, statistics, research, and clinical trials.  Small Intestine Cancer Treatment   Find NCI-Supported Clinical Trials   Cancer Prevention Overview (PDQ®)   Cancer Screening Overview (PDQ®)  The information in this section is meant to help you cope with the many issues and concerns that occur when you have cancer. Targeted Treatment for Rare Digestive Tract Cancers May Extend Survival Drug Combination Shrinks Duodenal Polyps in People with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: EPOCH - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/epoch
txt: This combination contains the chemotherapy drugs etoposide phosphate, vincristine sulfate (Oncovin), cyclophosphamide,  and doxorubicin hydrochloride (hydroxydaunomycin) and the steroid hormone prednisone. Combinations usually work better than single drugs because 
         different drugs kill 
         cancer 
         cells in different ways. Each of the drugs in this combination is approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat cancer or conditions related to cancer. EPOCH is used to treat: Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). This combination may also be used with other drugs or treatments or to treat other types of cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Symptoms of Cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/diagnosis-staging/symptoms
txt: If you have symptoms that last for a couple of weeks, it is important to see a doctor. Cancer can cause many symptoms, but these symptoms are most often caused by illness, injury, benign tumors, or other problems. If you have symptoms that do not get better after a few weeks, see your doctor so that problems can be diagnosed and treated as early as possible. Often, cancer does not cause pain, so do not wait to feel pain before seeing a doctor. 
To learn more about symptoms for a specific cancer, see the list of PDQ® cancer treatment summaries for adult and childhood cancers. Each summary includes detailed information about symptoms caused by a specific cancer.
Some of the symptoms that cancer may cause include:Breast changes Lump or firm feeling in your breast or under your arm  Nipple changes or discharge  Skin that is itchy, red, scaly, dimpled, or puckered  Bladder changes Trouble urinating  Pain when urinating  Blood in the urine  Bleeding or bruising, for no known reason Bowel changes Blood in the stools  Changes in bowel habits  Cough or hoarseness that does not go away Eating problems Pain after eating (heartburn or indigestion that doesn’t go away)  Trouble swallowing  Belly pain  Nausea and vomiting  Appetite changes  Fatigue that is severe and lasts Fever or night sweats for no known reason Mouth changes A white or red patch on the tongue or in your mouth  Bleeding, pain, or numbness in the lip or mouth  Neurological problems Headaches  Seizures  Vision changes  Hearing changes  Drooping of the face  Skin changes A flesh-colored lump that bleeds or turns scaly  A new mole or a change in an existing mole  A sore that does not heal  Jaundice (yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes)   Swelling or lumps anywhere such as in the neck, underarm, stomach, and groin Weight gain or weight loss for no known reason Connect with our cancer information specialists. Phone: 1-800-4-CANCER Chat: LiveHelpEmail: NCIinfo@nih.gov Available Monday–Friday 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. ET.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Gallbladder Cancer—Patient Version - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/gallbladder
txt: Gallbladder cancer is a rare cancer that is usually diagnosed late due a to lack of early signs and symptoms. It is sometimes found when the gallbladder is checked for gallstones or removed. Explore the links on this page to learn more about gallbladder cancer treatment and clinical trials.  Gallbladder Cancer Treatment   Clinical Trials to Treat Gallbladder Cancer  NCI does not have PDQ evidence-based information about prevention of gallbladder cancer.  Cancer Prevention Overview (PDQ®)  NCI does not have PDQ evidence-based information about screening for gallbladder cancer.  Cancer Screening Overview (PDQ®)  The information in this section is meant to help you cope with the many issues and concerns that occur when you have cancer.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Technology Transfer and Small Business Partnerships - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/nci-role/partners-collaborators
txt: NCI collaborates with partners from across the country and the globe to improve patients' lives and advance cancer research. NCI is involved in many research-related collaborations and partnerships, including efforts to advance the development of new medical devices and therapies, move new technologies from the lab to the clinic, advance research, and spur economic development. NCI engages in these important research opportunities that otherwise might not be possible because of their complexity and cost, driving innovation and ensuring the judicious use of public resources. By bringing together investigators and businesses and supporting small businesses, these efforts have helped, and will continue to help, reduce the cancer burden in the United States and well beyond its borders.  Technology Transfer Center  Small Business Innovation Research and Small Business Technology Transfer  Technology Transfer Center Small Business Innovation Research and Small Business Technology Transfer Technology Transfer Center NCI has a long history of partnering with private-sector life sciences companies. Often these collaborations support the development of new, innovative technologies or potential new therapies, including those for rare cancers, for which the private sector traditionally has been reluctant to allocate sufficient resources. NCI's Technology Transfer Center helps to advance inventions ‘across the finish line.’ Staff from NCI’s Technology Transfer Center work closely with NIH investigators to negotiate agreements with outside parties, including universities and pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, to facilitate commercialization efforts to benefit public health. One of the most enduring and successful mechanisms for promoting collaboration between NCI and the private sector is through Cooperative Research and Development Agreements (CRADAs), a mechanism used throughout the federal government. Under a CRADA, NCI researchers and scientists from the partner organization conduct laboratory and early human studies needed to advance promising new technologies or therapeutics to late-stage studies. CRADAs between NCI and private-sector companies are increasingly used to develop targeted therapies and immunotherapy treatments for both pediatric and adult cancers. For example, through a CRADA with one small biotechnology company, NCI is leading the first trial of an immune-based treatment that will include patients with a rare cancer, called chordoma, for which there are few effective treatments. The evolution of cancer care toward precision medicine, in which treatments are based on the molecular makeup of tumors rather than on their anatomic location in the body, will require complex clinical trial designs. NCI has developed partnerships with pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies to launch a series of precision medicine trials, some of which, like the MATCH trial, use both FDA-approved and investigational therapies from multiple companies—something that traditionally has been extremely difficult to do. Small Business Innovation Research and Small Business Technology Transfer NCI offers funds to spur the development of new cancer therapies and technologies. Through its Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) programs, NCI provides research and development support to small companies at strategic times during the development life cycle of novel cancer-related biomedical products. These funds encourage small, innovative companies to participate in research and development activities that have the potential for private-sector commercialization and public benefit. The programs are specifically set up to help small businesses develop and commercialize innovative devices, diagnostics, algorithms, and therapeutics to improve cancer research, prevention, detection, and care. These SBIR/STTR awards are often leveraged by small businesses to attract funding from larger firms and venture capital companies. NCI’s SBIR/STTR programs have supported the development of numerous technologies since 1982. In 2018, the portfolio contained 475 projects, including drugs, in vitro diagnostics, devices, and other technologies. For example, SBIR supported the development of CYAD-101, a CAR T-cell therapy made from healthy donor immune cells instead of a patient’s own immune cells. CYAD-101 is being tested as a treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer but has the potential to treat other cancers as well. Following the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA) approval of an investigational new drug application for CYAD-101 in 2018, three phase 1 trials were designed to evaluate the efficacy and optimal dosage of this CAR T-cell therapy against several other cancers that have been challenging to treat, including bladder, pancreatic, ovarian, and triple-negative breast cancer. A recent economic impact study showed that the SBIR/STTR programs can improve the lives of patients by strengthening the role of small businesses that develop innovative cancer technologies. The study found that NCI received a strong return on investment in supporting small businesses, with an estimate as high as $33 returned for every $1 invested.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Emotional Support for Young People with Cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/aya/support
txt: Psychosocial support and counseling can help young people with cancer develop skills to manage the emotional side effects of cancer. Receiving a cancer diagnosis and going through treatment can make you feel as if you’re on an emotional rollercoaster. This is especially true for young adults. You may feel shocked, afraid, angry, sad, embarrassed, and lonely as you start treatment. Over the course of your illness you, like many other young people, may also feel hopeful, determined, and optimistic. These are often referred to as the psychosocial effects of cancer treatment. Just as you talk with your treatment team about the physical side effects of cancer treatment, it’s also important to talk about how you are feeling emotionally. Depending upon your age and cancer type you may be treated at a children’s hospital by a pediatric oncologist, or at a university hospital or medical center by a medical oncologist who treats adults with cancer. A growing number of hospitals, including many NCI-Designated Cancer Centers, offer psychosocial support programs designed for young people with cancer. These programs may include art therapy, music therapy, adventure-based programs, fertility preservation programs, and young adult support groups.  Next Steps after a Cancer Diagnosis  Support for Young People during Cancer Treatment  Making a Mental Health Care Plan to Navigate Your Cancer Journey  Advancing Psychosocial Support for Young People with Cancer  Next Steps after a Cancer Diagnosis Support for Young People during Cancer Treatment Making a Mental Health Care Plan to Navigate Your Cancer Journey Advancing Psychosocial Support for Young People with Cancer Next Steps after a Cancer Diagnosis As a young person, you’re probably new to the health care system and haven’t yet had to make major health decisions. Use the strategies listed below to gain a sense of control as you begin treatment. Learn about your cancer type and treatment options. Being knowledgeable about the type of cancer you have and your treatment options can help you play an active role in your care. There’s a lot of information online and not all of it is relevant to your specific cancer diagnosis or to cancer in young adults. Keep in mind that based on your age and cancer type you may be treated according to a pediatric cancer treatment protocol or an adult cancer treatment protocol. Many young people like to read everything they can about their cancer type and treatment options, whereas others prefer to get information directly from their doctor. It may help to think about the type of information-seeker and learner you are and to share your preferences with your doctor. Advocate for yourself. You will find your voice on this journey as you learn how to articulate what is important to you. Speaking up about things that are important to you will enable you to get your needs met. While it may be challenging, especially in the beginning, advocating for yourself will help you to feel more in charge. You may want to ask your treatment team to recommend mobile apps to help you track key information such as appointments, medications, and side effects. There are also apps to help you manage pain and stay fit. Ask questions. Think of the people on your treatment team as professors and coaches—knowledgeable and supportive experts who are giving you the best possible care and advice. To get the most from these experts, jot down your questions ahead of time and list your concerns in order of importance. During your appointment, repeat back key information and ask clarifying questions to make sure you’ve understood the information. As a young person you may have questions about preserving your fertility and coping with fatigue and hair loss. Here are tips to manage these and other cancer treatment side effects.  You may want to ask your social worker or nurse about strategies to balance the demands of cancer treatment with attending school, working, and/or caring for young children. Support for Young People during Cancer Treatment Changes to your social life can be challenging. Here are ways to get the support you need during treatment: Keep relationships strong. When you’re used to sharing your adventures and accomplishments with your friends, a cancer diagnosis, and the rigors of treatment, can put you at a loss as to what to share and how to stay connected. Relationships may feel awkward and strained. Friends may be silent because they don’t know what to say or what you need. It can sometimes feel like your life is moving backwards, especially if you’ve taken a break from college, quit a job, or moved home to receive treatment. Although you may put up a brave front to protect family and friends, being open about what you are going through is a good place to start with people you are close to. Friends usually want to help but might not know how to reach out. You may need to take the first step. Think about what you feel comfortable sharing with, and asking for, from people, keeping in mind that your needs will probably change over the course of treatment. Sites such as CaringBridge, My Cancer Circle, MyLifeLine, or Lotsa Helping Hands can help you manage the challenge of sharing updates and asking for support. Keep finding things that bring you joy. When life is filled with change and uncertainty, it can help to think about the people and activities that are most important to you. Reflecting on what’s most important can help you figure out ways to bring these into your new normal. Doing so can help you stay grounded. Over time, you, like many other young people with cancer, may also choose to explore new interests and develop new skills. Journal your journey. Research has found that journaling can lower stress. Start small, a few minutes a day, and build up from there. There are different journaling strategies. Some people write down many thoughts and experiences. Others jot down a single thought or list a few things they are grateful for each day. Young cancer survivors have written blogs such as the Life Interrupted series and started organizations such as Cactus Cancer Society that offer creative writing workshops. Many hospitals also offer journaling programs. Reach out to young adult advocates and patients. You may choose to connect with other young people who have been diagnosed with cancer and can relate to your experiences. Many organizations listed in the young adult cancer resources section were started by young adult cancer survivors. Books written by young adults with cancer, such as Planet Cancer and Everything Changes: The Insider's Guide to Cancer in Your 20s and 30s may also be helpful. There’s also an annual conference called CancerCon that connects young people who have been affected by cancer. Consider physical activities. Staying physically active during treatment may help you feel better. Exercising can strengthen muscles that may otherwise become weak during treatment. It can also help to prevent fatigue and lift your spirits. What you’ll be able to do physically will vary over the course of treatment—ranging from movement exercises to strenuous workouts. Meeting with a physical therapist can help you to choose exercises that are best for you. At times when it’s all you can do to manage your daily routine you’ll want to get advice from an occupational therapist. And when you’re up for it, you may want to look at the outdoor therapy programs listed in the young adult cancer resources section. Making a Mental Health Care Plan to Navigate Your Cancer Journey It is as important to take care of your mental health as it is your physical health. Your emotional well-being will shift as you go through treatment. It’s common to experience periods of anxiety and difficulty adjusting, as well as hope and optimism. Here are suggestions that can help: Acknowledge your emotions. Although it’s normal to feel down at times, signs of depression are more serious and often include no longer enjoying your favorite activities, changes to sleeping habits, feeling worthless, and/or having thoughts about suicide. If you have these feelings every day for several weeks, they may be signs of depression. Learn more about adjusting to cancer, including feelings of anxiety and distress. The National Suicide Prevention Lifeline also has information that may help you or someone you know. Meet with a mental health expert. Talking with friends and family may help. However, fears related to treatment, coping with distress, and issues with relationships can be difficult to talk about. Mental health experts, who specialize in caring for young people, can counsel you, as well as provide strategies and relaxation techniques that are tailored to you. These experts may include people such as psychologists, social workers, mental health counselors, and psychiatrists. Ask about age-specific support groups and programs. While most hospitals offer cancer support groups, a growing number of hospitals also have teen- and young adult-specific groups and programs. Online and in-person coping and support programs are offered by groups listed in NCI’s young adult cancer resources section. Consider mind-body practices to relax. Integrative medicine practices such as biofeedback, breathing exercises, guided imagery, hypnosis, meditation, and yoga are often of special interest to young people with cancer. You can learn about these and other integrative medicine practices on this A to Z list of health topics from the NIH’s National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. Rely on your faith or belief system. Focusing on your spiritual journey can help you to deal with hard times. Coping with hair loss, hospital stays, amputation, scars, and weight changes are particularly difficult issues that some young people with cancer experience. While not everyone identifies with a specific faith, some young people find that praying, meditating, and/or talking with a spiritual leader is helpful. Learn more about spirituality in cancer care. Advancing Psychosocial Support for Young People with Cancer Collaboration between young people with cancer and the people on their treatment team can help to design programs that are relevant to the needs of young people with cancer. You and your treatment team may learn more about working together in this article that discusses how adolescents and young adults with cancer collaborated and served as advisors for young adult programs. There are a growing number of coping and support clinical trials for young people listed in the NCI Clinical Trials database and the NIH Clinical Trials database such as the Promoting Resilience in Stress Management (PRISM) Intervention. This PRISM clinical trial is working to reduce anxiety and depression in adolescents and young adults with cancer who are undergoing a stem cell transplant.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Interview with Sanya A. Springfield, Ph.D. - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/crchd/about/director/springfield-interview
txt: Interview with Sanya A. Springfield, Ph.D. CRCHD Director Sanya A. Springfield, Ph.D. speaks with the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) on the issue of cancer health disparities.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: CCDI Progress - National Cancer Institute - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/childhood/childhood-cancer-data-initiative/progress
txt: The Childhood Cancer Data Initiative (CCDI) represents a national commitment to harnessing and sharing data in ways to make faster progress in childhood cancers. The initiative has made significant progress on all its foundational goals and the work continues. The goals are: gathering data from every child, adolescent, and young adult (AYA) diagnosed with a childhood cancer, regardless of where they receive their care  creating a national strategy of appropriate clinical and molecular characterization to speed diagnosis and inform treatment for all types of childhood cancers  developing a platform and tools to bring together clinical care and research data that will improve preventive measures, treatment, quality of life, and survivorship for childhood cancers  The Power of Improved Data Sharing - Childhood Cancer Data Initiative The Childhood Cancer Data Initiative (CCDI) is working to improve how data is generated, connected, and shared in order to make faster progress in childhood cancer. Learn more about some of CCDI's ongoing activities. Following CCDI’s launch, NCI brought together diverse groups from across the childhood cancer community and NCI’s advisory boards, committees, and working groups to gather information on what is needed to maximize the use of childhood cancer data. While building on recommendations from a report from the NCI Board of Scientific Advisors ad hoc working group for CCDI, NCI focused on strengthening existing childhood cancer research programs and developing systems and resources to support future CCDI activities. Through working groups, events, and ongoing stakeholder engagement, CCDI is continuously gathering community input and aligning with the needs of patients, families, and researchers. The initiative is making progress to move childhood cancer research forward at NCI and beyond. A snapshot of that progress is given below. To meaningfully connect and share childhood cancer data across the community, an infrastructure of data systems and user-friendly tools is required to find and access this information. The CCDI Data Ecosystem is a dynamic and evolving infrastructure that is bringing together data from various collections generated or held at institutions around the country and worldwide, ensuring its quality, and aligning or standardizing across the information so that it can be presented consistently back to the community. Get information about CCDI's resources. Specific resources have also already been developed for the ecosystem with community input to make these data easier to find, use, and understand. These include the: NCCR*Explorer, which links clinical patient data and was created out of the community desire for longitudinal, population-based information on young people with cancer. It is part of the National Childhood Cancer Registry.  Childhood Cancer Data Catalog, the first promised deliverable of CCDI. The community wanted a singular place to find information on what data are available and for the first time, this place now exists in the form of the data catalog.  Molecular Targets Platform, which meets the community need for gathering preclinical data that validates what drugs certain molecules involved in cancer growth respond to.  These tools are helping improve treatments for childhood cancers in alignment with the Research to Accelerate Cures and Equity (RACE) for Children Act and support structure and data collection for biobanking and survivorship studies in alignment with the Childhood Cancer Survivorship, Treatment, Access, and Research (STAR) Act. More resources and enhancements will be developed as the CCDI Data Ecosystem continues to grow. Foundational goals: gathering data from every child and AYA, developing a platform and tools Learn what MCI is and how it’s providing state-of-the-art testing at no cost. Data is added into the CCDI Data Ecosystem from within NCI and from other health care institutions performing childhood cancer research. Additionally, CCDI funds organizations to share their data and incorporates these data in the ecosystem. One source of new clinical sequence data is the Molecular Characterization Initiative (MCI). Launched in March 2022, the initiative is a national collaboration of the childhood cancer community that is providing free, state-of-the-art molecular testing to children and AYAs with certain rare or hard-to-treat cancers, with plans to further expand. MCI provides precise variant detection to enhance diagnoses quickly, enabling participants to get the best treatment. Over time, NCI expects comprehensive molecular characterization to become the standard of care for all children and AYAs with cancer, which can bring equity in the way childhood cancers are diagnosed and treated throughout the country. Through MCI, CCDI’s tumor tissue and blood biobanking also supports NCI childhood and AYA sample collection as part of the STAR Act. Foundational goals: gathering data from every child and AYA, creating a national strategy of appropriate clinical and molecular characterization Learn about projects CCDI funding supports. Comprehensive and meaningful data sets are necessary to learn from and develop better treatments and outcomes for all children and AYAs experiencing cancer. CCDI funding is supporting research studies and tools that drive our ability to use data effectively, including to establish cohorts that can help answer key scientific questions in childhood cancer. The initiative continues to evolve its programs, resources, and tools to make them as effective and helpful as possible, with community input and priorities in mind. For more on the status of CCDI’s efforts in building its data ecosystem and key programs, access "Childhood Cancer Data Initiative: Status Report," published in Pediatric Blood & Cancer. 
You can also find an overview of CCDI’s progress, activities, and next steps in the article, "The Childhood Cancer Data Initiative: Using the Power of Data to Learn From and Improve Outcomes for Every Child and Young Adult With Pediatric Cancer," published by the Journal of Clinical Oncology.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Radon - Cancer-Causing Substances - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/substances/radon
txt: Radon test kits can be used to check the radon levels in homes and other buildings. Radon is a radioactive gas that is released from the normal decay of the elements uranium, thorium, and radium in rocks and soil. The invisible, odorless gas seeps up through the ground and diffuses into the air. In a few areas, depending on local geology, radon dissolves into ground water and can be released into the air when the water is used. Radon gas usually exists at very low levels outdoors, but the gas can accumulate in areas without adequate ventilation, such as underground mines. Radon is present in nearly all air, so everyone breathes in radon every day, usually at very low levels. Radon can enter homes through cracks in floors, walls, or foundations, and collect indoors. It can also be released from building materials or from water obtained from wells that contain radon. Radon levels may be higher in homes that are well insulated, tightly sealed, and/or built on soil rich in the elements uranium, thorium, and radium. Basements and first floors typically have the highest radon levels because of their closeness to the ground. Workers employed in uranium, hard rock, and phosphate mining potentially are exposed to radon at high concentrations. Uranium miners generally are believed to have the highest exposures. Radon was identified as a health problem when scientists noted that underground uranium miners who were exposed to it died of lung cancer at high rates. Experimental studies in animals confirmed the results of the miner studies by showing higher rates of lung tumors among rodents exposed to high levels of radon. There has been a suggestion of an increased risk of leukemia associated with radon exposure in adults and children; the evidence, however, is not conclusive. Check the radon levels in your home regularly. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has more information about residential radon exposure and what people can do about it in its Consumer’s Guide to Radon Reduction: How to Fix Your Home. International Agency for Research on Cancer. Man-Made Mineral Fibres and Radon, IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, Volume 43. Lyon, France: World Health Organization, 1988. Also available online. Last accessed June 6, 2023.  National Toxicology Program. Ionizing Radiation, Report on Carcinogens, Fifteenth Edition. Triangle Park, NC: National Institute of Environmental Health and Safety, 2021. Also available online. Last accessed June 6, 2023.  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. A Citizen's Guide to Radon: The Guide to Protecting Yourself and Your Family from Radon. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2016. Available online. Last accessed June 6, 2023.  World Health Organization. WHO Handbook on Indoor Radon: A Public Health Perspective. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization, 2009. Also available online. Last accessed June 6, 2023. 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Vincristine Sulfate - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/vincristinesulfate
txt: This page contains brief information about vincristine sulfate and a collection of links to more information about the use of this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Vincristine sulfate is approved to treat adults and children with: Acute leukemia. Vincristine sulfate is sometimes used to treat adults and children with other types of cancer, including: Hodgkin lymphoma. Neuroblastoma. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Rhabdomyosarcoma. Wilms tumor. Vincristine sulfate is also being  studied in the treatment of other types of cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Vincristine Sulfate - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Find Clinical Trials for Vincristine Sulfate - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Immune System Modulators to Treat Cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/types/immunotherapy/immune-system-modulators
txt: When inserted directly into the bladder, BCG can cause an immune response against bladder cancer cells. Immune system modulators are a type of immunotherapy that enhance the body’s immune response against cancer.  What are the types of immune system modulators?  Which types of cancer are treated with immune system modulators?  What are the side effects of immune system modulators?  What are the types of immune system modulators? Which types of cancer are treated with immune system modulators? What are the side effects of immune system modulators? What are the types of immune system modulators? Types of immune system modulators include cytokines, BCG, and immunomodulatory drugs. Cytokines are proteins made by white blood cells. They play important roles in your body’s normal immune responses and in the immune system’s ability to respond to cancer. Cytokines that are sometimes used to treat cancer: Interferons (INFs). Researchers have found that one type of interferon, called INF-alfa, can enhance your immune response to cancer cells by causing certain white blood cells, such as natural killer cells and dendritic cells, to become active. INF-alfa may also slow the growth of cancer cells or promote their death.  Interleukins (ILs). There are more than a dozen interleukins, including IL-2, which is also called T-cell growth factor. IL-2 boosts the number of white blood cells in the body, including killer T cells and natural killer cells. Increasing these cells can cause an immune response against cancer. IL-2 also helps B cells (another type of white blood cell) produce certain substances that can target cancer cells.  Cytokines that are sometimes used to reduce side effects from cancer treatment are called hematopoietic growth factors. They promote the growth of blood cells that are damaged by chemotherapy: Erythropoietin, which increases the production of red blood cells.  IL-11, which increases the production of platelets.  Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), which both increase the number of white blood cells. Boosting white blood cells reduces the risk of infections. G-CSF and GM-CSF can also enhance the immune system response against cancer by increasing the number of cancer-fighting T cells.  BCG is a weakened form of the bacteria that causes tuberculosis. It does not cause disease in humans. BCG is used to treat bladder cancer. When inserted directly into the bladder with a catheter, BCG causes an immune response against cancer cells. It is also being studied in other types of cancer. BCG stands for Bacillus Calmette-Guérin. Immunomodulatory drugs (also called biological response modifiers) stimulate the immune system. They include thalidomide (Thalomid®)  lenalidomide (Revlimid®)  pomalidomide (Pomalyst®)  imiquimod (Aldara®, Zyclara®)  Thalidomide, lenaliodomide, and pomalidomide cause cells to release IL-2. They also stop tumors from forming new blood vessels. Tumors need to form new blood vessels to grow beyond a certain size. These three drugs may also be called angiogenesis inhibitors. Imiquimod is a cream that you rub on the skin. It causes cells to release cytokines. Nonspecific Immune Stimulation Learn about nonspecific immune stimulation, one type of immunotherapy used to treat cancer. Which types of cancer are treated with immune system modulators? Most immune-modulating agents are used to treat advanced cancer. Some are used to help manage side effects. What are the side effects of immune system modulators? Immune-modulating agents can cause side effects, which affect people in different ways. The side effects you may have and how they make you feel will depend on how healthy you are before treatment, your type of cancer, how advanced it is, the type of immune-modulating agent you are getting, and the dose. Doctors and nurses cannot know for sure when or if side effects will occur or how serious they will be. So, it is important to know which signs to look for and what to do if you start to have problems. Immune-modulating agents can cause flu-like symptoms, which include fever  chills  weakness  dizziness  nausea or vomiting  muscle or joint aches  fatigue  headache  Learn more about flu-like symptoms caused by cancer treatment. Cytokines can also cause many serious side effects trouble breathing  low or high blood pressure  severe allergic reactions  lowered blood counts, which can raise the risk of infections and cause bleeding problems  blood clots  problems with mood, behavior, thinking, and memory  skin problems, such as rash, burning at injection site, and ulcers  organ damage  BCG can also cause urinary side effects. Thalidomide, lenalidomide, and pomalidomide can cause blood clots  nerve problems that lead to pain, numbness, tingling, swelling, or muscle weakness in different parts of the body  birth defects, if used during pregnancy  Imiquimod can cause skin reactions.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Treatment - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/lung/patient/non-small-cell-lung-treatment-pdq
txt:  General Information About Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer  Stages of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer  Treatment Option Overview  Treatment of Occult Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer  Treatment of Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ)  Treatment of Stage I Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer  Treatment of Stage II Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer  Treatment of Stage IIIA Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer  Treatment of Stage IIIB and Stage IIIC Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer  Treatment of Newly Diagnosed Stage IV, Relapsed, and Recurrent Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer  Treatment of Progressive  Stage IV,  Relapsed, and Recurrent Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer  To Learn More About Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer  About This PDQ Summary  Non-small cell lung cancer is a disease in which malignant
		  (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the lung. There are several types of non-small cell lung cancer. Smoking  is the major risk factor for non-small cell lung cancer. Signs of non-small cell lung cancer include a cough that doesn't go away and shortness of breath. Tests that examine the lungs are used to diagnose and stage non-small cell lung cancer. If lung cancer is suspected, a biopsy is done. Certain factors affect  prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. For most patients with non-small cell lung cancer, current
		  treatments do not cure the cancer. The lungs are a pair of cone-shaped organs in the chest. The lungs bring oxygen into the body as you breathe in. They release carbon dioxide, a waste product of the body's cells, as you breathe out. Each
		  lung has sections called lobes. The left lung has two
		  lobes. The right lung is
		  slightly larger and has three lobes.  Two
		  tubes called bronchi lead from the
		  trachea (windpipe) to the right and
		  left lungs. The bronchi are sometimes also involved in lung cancer.  Tiny air sacs called alveoli and small tubes called
		  bronchioles make up the inside of
		  the lungs.EnlargeAnatomy of the respiratory system showing the trachea, the right and left lungs and their lobes, and the bronchi. The lymph nodes and the diaphragm are also shown. Oxygen is inhaled into the lungs and passes through the alveoli (the tiny air sacs at the end of the bronchioles) and into the bloodstream (see inset), where it travels to the tissues throughout the body. A thin  membrane called the
		  pleura  covers the outside of each lung and lines the inside wall of the chest cavity. This creates a sac called the pleural cavity.  
The pleural  cavity normally contains a small amount of fluid that helps the lungs  move smoothly in the chest when you breathe. There are  two main types of lung cancer: non-small cell lung cancer and
		  small cell lung cancer. Each type of non-small cell lung cancer has different kinds of cancer cells. The cancer
		  cells of each type grow and spread in different ways. The types of non-small
		  cell lung cancer are named for the kinds of cells found in the cancer and how
		  the cells look under a microscope: Squamous cell
			 carcinoma: Cancer that forms in the thin, flat cells lining the inside of the lungs. This is also called epidermoid
			 carcinoma. Large cell
			 carcinoma: Cancer that may begin in several types of large cells. Adenocarcinoma:
			 Cancer that begins in the cells that line the alveoli and make substances such as mucus. Other less common types of non-small cell lung cancer are: adenosquamous carcinoma, sarcomatoid carcinoma, salivary gland carcinoma, carcinoid tumor, and unclassified carcinoma. Anything that increases your chance of getting a disease
		  is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. Talk to your doctor if you think you may be at risk for lung cancer. Risk factors for lung cancer include the following: Smoking cigarettes, pipes, or cigars, now or in the past. This is the most important risk factor for lung cancer. The earlier in life a person starts smoking, the more often a person smokes, and the more years a person smokes, the greater the risk of lung cancer. Being exposed to secondhand smoke. Being exposed to asbestos, arsenic, chromium, beryllium, nickel, soot, or tar in the workplace. Being exposed to radiation from any of the following:Radiation therapy to the breast or chest.Radon in the home or workplace.Imaging tests such as CT scans.Atomic bomb radiation. Living where there is air pollution. Having a family history of lung cancer. Being infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Taking beta carotene supplements and being a heavy smoker. Radiation therapy to the breast or chest. Radon in the home or workplace. Imaging tests such as CT scans. Atomic bomb radiation. Older age is the main risk factor for most cancers. The chance of getting cancer increases as you get older. When smoking is combined with other risk factors, the risk of lung cancer is increased. Sometimes lung cancer does not cause any signs or symptoms. It may be found during a chest x-ray done for another condition.  Signs and symptoms may be caused by lung cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the  following: Chest discomfort or pain. A cough that doesn’t go away or gets worse over time. Trouble breathing. Wheezing. Blood in sputum (mucus coughed up from the lungs). Hoarseness. Loss of appetite. Weight loss for no known reason. Feeling very  tired. Trouble swallowing. Swelling in the face and/or veins in the neck. Tests and procedures to diagnose and stage non-small cell lung cancer are often done at the same time. In addition to asking about your personal and family health history and doing a physical exam, your doctor may perform the following tests and procedures: Laboratory tests: Medical procedures that test samples of tissue, blood, urine, or other substances in the body.  These tests help to diagnose disease, plan and check treatment, or monitor the disease over time. Chest x-ray: An x-ray of the organs and bones inside the chest. An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body.
EnlargeA chest x-ray is used to take pictures of the structures and organs inside the chest. X-rays pass through the patient's body onto film or a computer. CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the chest, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. Sputum cytology: A procedure in which a pathologist views a sample of    sputum (mucus coughed up from the lungs) under a microscope, to check for cancer cells. Thoracentesis: The removal of fluid from the space between the lining of the chest and the lung, using a needle. A pathologist views the fluid under a microscope to look for cancer cells. One of the following types of biopsies is usually used: Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy of the lung:  The removal of tissue or fluid from the lung using a thin needle.    A CT scan, ultrasound, or other imaging procedure is used to locate the abnormal tissue or fluid in the lung. A small incision may be made in the skin where the biopsy needle is inserted into the abnormal tissue or fluid. A sample is removed with the needle and sent to the laboratory. A pathologist then views the sample under a microscope to look for cancer cells. A chest x-ray is done after the procedure to make sure no air is leaking from the lung into the chest.EnlargeFine-needle aspiration biopsy of the lung. The patient lies on a table that slides through the computed tomography (CT) machine, which takes x-ray pictures of the inside of the body. The x-ray pictures help the doctor see where the abnormal tissue is in the lung. A biopsy needle is inserted through the chest wall and into the area of abnormal lung tissue. A small piece of tissue is removed through the needle and checked under the microscope for signs of cancer. An endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) is a type of ultrasound that may be used to guide an FNA biopsy of the lung, lymph nodes, or other areas. EUS is a procedure in which an endoscope is inserted into the body.  An endoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing.  A probe at the end of the endoscope is used to bounce high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) off internal tissues or organs and make echoes.  The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram.EnlargeEndoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy. An endoscope that has an ultrasound probe and a biopsy needle is inserted through the mouth and into the esophagus. The probe bounces sound waves off body tissues to make echoes that form a sonogram (computer picture) of the lymph nodes near the esophagus. The sonogram helps the doctor see where to place the biopsy needle to remove tissue from the lymph nodes.  This tissue is checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. Bronchoscopy: A procedure to look inside the trachea and large airways in the lung for abnormal areas. A bronchoscope is inserted through the nose or mouth into the trachea and lungs. A bronchoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a  tool to remove tissue samples, which are checked under a microscope for signs of cancer.EnlargeBronchoscopy. A bronchoscope is inserted through the mouth, trachea, and major bronchi into the lung, to look for abnormal areas. A bronchoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a cutting tool. Tissue samples may be taken to be checked under a microscope for signs of disease. Thoracoscopy: A surgical procedure to look at the organs inside the chest to check for abnormal areas. An incision (cut) is made between two ribs, and a thoracoscope is inserted into the chest.  A thoracoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a tool to remove tissue or lymph node samples, which are checked under a microscope for signs of cancer.  In some cases, this procedure is used to remove part of the esophagus or lung. If certain tissues, organs, or lymph nodes can’t be reached, a thoracotomy may be done. In this procedure, a larger incision is made between the ribs and the chest is opened. Mediastinoscopy: A surgical procedure to look at the organs, tissues, and lymph nodes between the lungs for abnormal areas.  An incision (cut) is made at the top of the breastbone and a mediastinoscope is inserted into the chest.  A mediastinoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a tool to remove tissue or lymph node samples, which are checked under a microscope for signs of cancer.EnlargeMediastinoscopy. A mediastinoscope is inserted into the chest through an
incision above the breastbone to look for abnormal areas between the
lungs. A mediastinoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light
and a lens for viewing. It may also have a cutting tool. Tissue samples
may be taken from lymph nodes on the right side of the chest and checked
under a microscope for signs of cancer. In an anterior mediastinotomy
(Chamberlain procedure), the incision is made beside the breastbone to
remove tissue samples from the lymph nodes on the left side of the
chest. Anterior
			 mediastinotomy: A surgical procedure to look at the organs and tissues between the lungs and between the breastbone and heart for abnormal areas. An incision (cut) is made next to the breastbone and a mediastinoscope is inserted into the chest.  A mediastinoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a  tool to remove tissue or lymph node samples, which are checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. This is also called the Chamberlain procedure. Lymph node biopsy: The removal of all or part of a lymph node. A pathologist views the lymph node tissue under a microscope to check for cancer cells. An endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) is a type of ultrasound that may be used to guide an FNA biopsy of the lung, lymph nodes, or other areas. EUS is a procedure in which an endoscope is inserted into the body.  An endoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing.  A probe at the end of the endoscope is used to bounce high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) off internal tissues or organs and make echoes.  The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. One or more of the following laboratory tests may be done to study the tissue samples: Molecular test: A laboratory test to check for certain genes, proteins, or other molecules in a sample of tissue, blood, or other body fluid. Molecular tests check for certain gene or chromosome changes that occur in non-small cell lung cancer. Immunohistochemistry:   A laboratory test that uses antibodies to check for certain antigens (markers) in a sample of a patient’s tissue. The antibodies are usually linked to an enzyme or a fluorescent dye. After the antibodies bind to a specific antigen in the tissue sample, the enzyme or dye is activated, and the antigen can then be seen under a microscope. This type of test is used to help diagnose cancer and to help tell one type of cancer from another type of cancer. The prognosis and treatment options depend on the following: The stage of the cancer (the size of the tumor and whether it is
		  in the lung only or has spread to other places in the body). The type of lung
		  cancer. Whether the cancer has mutations (changes) in certain genes, such as the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene or the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene. Whether there are signs and symptoms such as coughing or trouble breathing. The patient’s general health. If lung cancer is found, taking part in one of the many clinical
		  trials being done to improve treatment should be considered. Clinical trials
		  are taking place in most parts of the country for patients with all stages of
		  non-small cell lung cancer. Information about ongoing clinical trials is
		  available from the NCI website. After lung cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to
		  find out if cancer cells have spread within the lungs or to other parts of the
		  body. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. The following stages are used for non-small cell lung
		  cancer:Occult (hidden) stageStage 0Stage IStage IIStage IIIStage IV Non-small cell
		lung cancer can recur
		(come back) after it has been treated. Occult (hidden) stage Stage 0 Stage I Stage II Stage III Stage IV The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the lungs or to other parts
		  of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the
		  staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is
		  important to know the stage  in order to plan treatment. Some of the tests used to diagnose non-small cell lung cancer are also used to stage the disease. For more information, see the General Information section. Other  tests and procedures
		  that may be used in the staging process include the following: MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the brain. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the brain, abdomen, and lymph nodes, taken from different angles.  The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.  This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. PET scan (positron emission tomography scan): A procedure to find cancer cells in the body. A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein. The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do.EnlargePET (positron emission tomography) scan. The patient lies on a table that slides through the PET machine.  The head rest and white strap help the patient lie still.  A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into the patient's vein, and a scanner makes a picture of where the glucose is being used in the body.  Cancer cells show up brighter in the picture because they take up more glucose than normal cells do. Bone scan: A procedure to check if there are rapidly dividing cells, such as cancer cells, in the bone. A very small amount of radioactive material is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream. The radioactive material collects in the bones with cancer and is detected by a scanner. Pulmonary function test (PFT): A test to see how well the lungs are working. It measures how much air the lungs can hold and how quickly air moves into and out of the lungs. It also measures how much oxygen is used and how much carbon dioxide is given off during breathing. This is also called lung function test. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy: The removal of bone marrow, blood, and a small piece of bone by inserting a hollow needle into the hipbone or breastbone. A pathologist views the bone marrow, blood, and bone under a microscope to look for signs of cancer. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if  non-small cell lung cancer spreads to the brain, the cancer cells in the brain are actually lung cancer cells. The disease is metastatic lung cancer, not brain cancer. In the occult (hidden) stage, cancer cannot be seen by imaging or bronchoscopy. Cancer cells are found in sputum or bronchial washings (a sample of cells taken from inside the airways that lead to the lungs). Cancer may have spread to other parts of the body. In stage 0, abnormal cells are found in the  lining of the airways. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue. Stage 0 may be adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS) or squamous cell carcinoma in situ (SCIS). In stage I, cancer has formed. Stage I is divided into stages IA and IB. Stage IA:EnlargeStage IA lung cancer. The tumor is in the lung only and is 3 centimeters or smaller. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes.The tumor is in the lung only and is 3 centimeters or smaller. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes. Stage IB:EnlargeStage IB lung cancer. The tumor is larger than 3 centimeters but not larger than 4 centimeters. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes; OR the tumor is 4 centimeters or smaller. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes and one or more of the following is found: (a) cancer has spread to the main bronchus, but has not spread to the carina; and/or (b) cancer has spread to the inner membrane that covers the lung; and/or (c) part of the lung or the whole lung has collapsed or has pneumonitis (inflammation of the lung).The tumor is larger than 3 centimeters but not larger than 4 centimeters. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes.orThe tumor is 4 centimeters or smaller and one or more of the following is found: Cancer has spread to the main bronchus, but has not spread to the carina. Cancer has spread to the innermost layer of the membrane that covers the lung. Part of the lung or the whole lung has collapsed or has developed pneumonitis. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes. The tumor is in the lung only and is 3 centimeters or smaller. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes. The tumor is larger than 3 centimeters but not larger than 4 centimeters. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes. or The tumor is 4 centimeters or smaller and one or more of the following is found: Cancer has spread to the main bronchus, but has not spread to the carina. Cancer has spread to the innermost layer of the membrane that covers the lung. Part of the lung or the whole lung has collapsed or has developed pneumonitis. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes. Stage II is divided into stages IIA and IIB. Stage IIA:EnlargeStage IIA lung cancer. The tumor is larger than 4 centimeters but not larger than 5 centimeters. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes and one or more of the following may be found: (a) cancer has spread to the main bronchus, but has not spread to the carina; and/or (b) cancer has spread to the inner membrane that covers the lung; and/or (c) part of the lung or the whole lung has collapsed or has pneumonitis (inflammation of the lung).The tumor is larger than 4 centimeters but not larger than 5 centimeters. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes and one or more of the following may be found: Cancer has spread to the main bronchus, but has not spread to the carina. Cancer has spread to the innermost layer of the membrane that covers the lung.Part of the lung or the whole lung has collapsed or has developed pneumonitis. Stage IIB:EnlargeStage IIB lung cancer (1). The primary tumor is 5 centimeters or smaller and cancer has spread to the lymph nodes on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor. The lymph nodes with cancer are in the lung or near the bronchus.The tumor is 5 centimeters or smaller and cancer has spread to lymph nodes on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor. The lymph nodes with cancer are in the lung or near the bronchus. Also, one or more of the following may be found:Cancer has spread to the main bronchus, but has not spread to the carina. Cancer has spread to the innermost layer of the membrane that covers the lung.Part of the lung or the whole lung has collapsed or has developed pneumonitis. orEnlargeStage IIB lung cancer (2). Cancer has not spread to lymph nodes and one or more of the following is found: (a) the primary tumor is larger than 5 centimeters but not larger than 7 centimeters; and/or (b) there are one or more separate tumors in the same lobe of the lung as the primary tumor; and/or cancer has spread to any of the following: (c) the chest wall and/or the membrane that lines the inside of the chest wall, (d) the nerve that controls the diaphragm, and/or (e) the outer layer of tissue of the sac around the heart.Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes and one or more of the following is found: The tumor is larger than 5 centimeters but not larger than 7 centimeters.There are one or more separate tumors in the same lobe of the lung as the primary tumor. Cancer has spread to any of the following: The membrane that lines the inside of the chest wall.Chest wall.The nerve that controls the diaphragm.Outer layer of tissue of the sac around the heart. The tumor is larger than 4 centimeters but not larger than 5 centimeters. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes and one or more of the following may be found: Cancer has spread to the main bronchus, but has not spread to the carina. Cancer has spread to the innermost layer of the membrane that covers the lung. Part of the lung or the whole lung has collapsed or has developed pneumonitis. The tumor is 5 centimeters or smaller and cancer has spread to lymph nodes on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor. The lymph nodes with cancer are in the lung or near the bronchus. Also, one or more of the following may be found: Cancer has spread to the main bronchus, but has not spread to the carina. Cancer has spread to the innermost layer of the membrane that covers the lung. Part of the lung or the whole lung has collapsed or has developed pneumonitis. or Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes and one or more of the following is found: The tumor is larger than 5 centimeters but not larger than 7 centimeters. There are one or more separate tumors in the same lobe of the lung as the primary tumor. Cancer has spread to any of the following: The membrane that lines the inside of the chest wall.Chest wall.The nerve that controls the diaphragm.Outer layer of tissue of the sac around the heart. The membrane that lines the inside of the chest wall. Chest wall. The nerve that controls the diaphragm. Outer layer of tissue of the sac around the heart. Stage III is divided into stages IIIA, IIIB, and IIIC. Stage IIIA: EnlargeStage IIIA lung cancer (1). The tumor is 5 centimeters or smaller and cancer has spread to lymph nodes on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor. The lymph nodes with cancer are around the trachea or aorta (not shown),  or where the trachea divides into the bronchi. Also, one or more of the following may be found: (a) cancer has spread to the main bronchus, but has not spread to the carina; and/or (b) cancer has spread to the inner membrane that covers the lung; and/or (c) part of the lung or the whole lung has collapsed or has pneumonitis (inflammation of the lung).The tumor is 5 centimeters or smaller and cancer has spread to lymph nodes on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor. The lymph nodes with cancer are around the trachea or aorta, or where the trachea divides into the bronchi. Also, one or more of the following may be found:Cancer has spread to the main bronchus, but has not spread to the carina. Cancer has spread to the innermost layer of the membrane that covers the lung. Part of the lung or the whole lung has collapsed or has developed pneumonitis. orEnlargeStage IIIA lung cancer (2). Cancer has spread to lymph nodes on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor. The lymph nodes with cancer are in the lung or near the bronchus. Also, one or more of the following is found: (a) the tumor is larger than 5 centimeters but not larger than 7 centimeters; and/or (b) there are one or more separate tumors in the same lobe of the lung as the primary tumor; and/or cancer has spread to any of the following: (c) the chest wall and/or the membrane that lines the inside of the chest wall, (d) the nerve that controls the diaphragm, and/or (e) the outer layer of tissue of the sac around the heart.Cancer has spread to lymph nodes on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor. The lymph nodes with cancer are in the lung or near the bronchus. Also, one or more of the following is found:The tumor is larger than 5 centimeters but not larger than 7 centimeters. There are one or more separate tumors in the same lobe of the lung as the primary tumor. Cancer has spread to any of the following: The membrane that lines the inside of the chest wall.Chest wall.The nerve that controls the diaphragm.Outer layer of tissue of the sac around the heart.orEnlargeStage IIIA lung cancer (3). Cancer may have spread to lymph nodes on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor. The lymph nodes with cancer are in the lung or near the bronchus. Also, one or more of the following is found: (a) the primary tumor is larger than 7 centimeters; and/or (b) there are one or more separate tumors in a different lobe of the lung with the primary tumor; and/or the tumor is any size and cancer has spread to any of the following: (c) trachea, (d) carina, (e) esophagus, (f) breastbone or backbone, (g) diaphragm, (h) heart, (i) major blood vessels that lead to or from the heart (aorta or vena cava), or the nerve that controls the larynx (not shown).Cancer may have spread to lymph nodes on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor. The lymph nodes with cancer are in the lung or near the bronchus. Also, one or more of the following is found:The tumor is larger than 7 centimeters. There are one or more separate tumors in a different lobe of the lung with the primary tumor. The tumor is any size and cancer has spread to any of the following: Trachea.Carina.Esophagus.Breastbone or backbone.Diaphragm.Heart.Major blood vessels that lead to or from the heart (aorta or vena cava).Nerve that controls the larynx (voice box). Stage IIIB: EnlargeStage IIIB lung cancer (1). The primary tumor is 5 centimeters or smaller and cancer has spread to lymph nodes above the collarbone on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor or to any lymph nodes on the opposite side of the chest as the primary tumor. Also, one or more of the following may be found: (a) cancer has spread to the main bronchus, but has not spread to the carina; and/or (b) cancer has spread to the inner membrane that covers the lung; and/or (c) part of the lung or the whole lung has collapsed or has pneumonitis (inflammation of the lung).The tumor is 5 centimeters or smaller and cancer has spread to lymph nodes above the collarbone on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor or to any lymph nodes on the opposite side of the chest as the primary tumor. Also, one or more of the following may be found: Cancer has spread to the main bronchus, but has not spread to the carina.Cancer has spread to the innermost layer of the membrane that covers the lung.Part of the lung or the whole lung has collapsed or has developed pneumonitis. orEnlargeStage IIIB lung cancer (2). The tumor may be any size and cancer has spread to lymph nodes on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor. The lymph nodes with cancer are around the trachea or aorta (not shown), or where the trachea divides into the bronchi.  Also, one or more of the following is found: (a) there are one or more separate tumors in the same lobe or a different lobe of the lung with the primary tumor; and/or (b) cancer has spread to any of the following: the chest wall or the membrane that lines the inside of the chest wall, the nerve that controls the voice box, the trachea, the carina, the esophagus, the breastbone or backbone (not shown), the diaphragm, the nerve that controls the diaphragm, the heart, the major blood vessels that lead to or from the heart (aorta or vena cava), or the outer layer of tissue of the sac around the heart.The tumor may be any size and cancer has spread to lymph nodes on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor. The lymph nodes with cancer are around the trachea or aorta, or where the trachea divides into the bronchi. Also, one or more of the following is found:There are one or more separate tumors in the same lobe or a different lobe of the lung with the primary tumor. Cancer has spread to any of the following: The membrane that lines the inside of the chest wall. Chest wall.The nerve that controls the diaphragm.Outer layer of tissue of the sac around the heart.Trachea.Carina.Esophagus.Breastbone or backbone.Diaphragm.Heart.Major blood vessels that lead to or from the heart (aorta or vena cava).Nerve that controls the larynx (voice box). Stage IIIC: EnlargeStage IIIC lung cancer. The tumor may be any size and cancer has spread to lymph nodes above the collarbone on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor or to any lymph nodes on the opposite side of the chest as the primary tumor. Also, one or more of the following is found: (a) there are one or more separate tumors in the same lobe or a different lobe of the lung with the primary tumor; and/or (b) cancer has spread to any of the following: the chest wall or the membrane that lines the inside of the chest wall, the nerve that controls the voice box, the trachea, the carina, the esophagus, the breastbone or backbone (not shown), the diaphragm, the nerve that controls the diaphragm, the heart, the major blood vessels that lead to or from the heart (aorta or vena cava), or the outer layer of tissue of the sac around the heart.The tumor may be any size and cancer has spread to lymph nodes above the collarbone on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor or to any lymph nodes on the opposite side of the chest as the primary tumor. Also, one or more of the following is found: There are one or more separate tumors in the same lobe or a different lobe of the lung with the primary tumor. Cancer has spread to any of the following: The membrane that lines the inside of the chest wall.Chest wall.The nerve that controls the diaphragm. Outer layer of tissue of the sac around the heart.Trachea.Carina.Esophagus.Breastbone or backbone.Diaphragm.Heart.Major blood vessels that lead to or from the heart (aorta or vena cava). Nerve that controls the larynx (voice box). The tumor is 5 centimeters or smaller and cancer has spread to lymph nodes on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor. The lymph nodes with cancer are around the trachea or aorta, or where the trachea divides into the bronchi. Also, one or more of the following may be found: Cancer has spread to the main bronchus, but has not spread to the carina. Cancer has spread to the innermost layer of the membrane that covers the lung. Part of the lung or the whole lung has collapsed or has developed pneumonitis. or Cancer has spread to lymph nodes on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor. The lymph nodes with cancer are in the lung or near the bronchus. Also, one or more of the following is found: The tumor is larger than 5 centimeters but not larger than 7 centimeters. There are one or more separate tumors in the same lobe of the lung as the primary tumor. Cancer has spread to any of the following: The membrane that lines the inside of the chest wall.Chest wall.The nerve that controls the diaphragm.Outer layer of tissue of the sac around the heart. The membrane that lines the inside of the chest wall. Chest wall. The nerve that controls the diaphragm. Outer layer of tissue of the sac around the heart. or Cancer may have spread to lymph nodes on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor. The lymph nodes with cancer are in the lung or near the bronchus. Also, one or more of the following is found: The tumor is larger than 7 centimeters. There are one or more separate tumors in a different lobe of the lung with the primary tumor. The tumor is any size and cancer has spread to any of the following: Trachea.Carina.Esophagus.Breastbone or backbone.Diaphragm.Heart.Major blood vessels that lead to or from the heart (aorta or vena cava).Nerve that controls the larynx (voice box). Trachea. Carina. Esophagus. Breastbone or backbone. Diaphragm. Heart. Major blood vessels that lead to or from the heart (aorta or vena cava). Nerve that controls the larynx (voice box). The tumor is 5 centimeters or smaller and cancer has spread to lymph nodes above the collarbone on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor or to any lymph nodes on the opposite side of the chest as the primary tumor. Also, one or more of the following may be found: Cancer has spread to the main bronchus, but has not spread to the carina. Cancer has spread to the innermost layer of the membrane that covers the lung. Part of the lung or the whole lung has collapsed or has developed pneumonitis. or The tumor may be any size and cancer has spread to lymph nodes on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor. The lymph nodes with cancer are around the trachea or aorta, or where the trachea divides into the bronchi. Also, one or more of the following is found: There are one or more separate tumors in the same lobe or a different lobe of the lung with the primary tumor. Cancer has spread to any of the following: The membrane that lines the inside of the chest wall. Chest wall.The nerve that controls the diaphragm.Outer layer of tissue of the sac around the heart.Trachea.Carina.Esophagus.Breastbone or backbone.Diaphragm.Heart.Major blood vessels that lead to or from the heart (aorta or vena cava).Nerve that controls the larynx (voice box). The membrane that lines the inside of the chest wall. Chest wall. The nerve that controls the diaphragm. Outer layer of tissue of the sac around the heart. Trachea. Carina. Esophagus. Breastbone or backbone. Diaphragm. Heart. Major blood vessels that lead to or from the heart (aorta or vena cava). Nerve that controls the larynx (voice box). The tumor may be any size and cancer has spread to lymph nodes above the collarbone on the same side of the chest as the primary tumor or to any lymph nodes on the opposite side of the chest as the primary tumor. Also, one or more of the following is found: There are one or more separate tumors in the same lobe or a different lobe of the lung with the primary tumor. Cancer has spread to any of the following: The membrane that lines the inside of the chest wall.Chest wall.The nerve that controls the diaphragm. Outer layer of tissue of the sac around the heart.Trachea.Carina.Esophagus.Breastbone or backbone.Diaphragm.Heart.Major blood vessels that lead to or from the heart (aorta or vena cava). Nerve that controls the larynx (voice box). The membrane that lines the inside of the chest wall. Chest wall. The nerve that controls the diaphragm. Outer layer of tissue of the sac around the heart. Trachea. Carina. Esophagus. Breastbone or backbone. Diaphragm. Heart. Major blood vessels that lead to or from the heart (aorta or vena cava). Nerve that controls the larynx (voice box). Stage IV is divided into stages IVA and IVB. Stage IVA:EnlargeStage IVA lung cancer. The tumor may be any size and cancer may have spread to the lymph nodes. One or more of the following is found: (a) there are one or more tumors in the lung that does not have the primary tumor; and/or (b) cancer is found in fluid around the lungs or heart or there are cancer nodules in the lining around the lungs or the sac around the heart; and/or (c) cancer has spread to one place in an organ or tissue not near the lung, such as the brain, adrenal gland, kidney, liver, or bone, or to a lymph node that is not near the lung. The tumor may be any size and cancer may have spread to the lymph nodes. One or more of the following is found: There are one or more tumors in the lung that does not have the primary tumor.Cancer is found in the lining around the lungs or the sac around the heart.Cancer is found in fluid around the lungs or the heart.Cancer has spread to one place in an organ not near the lung, such as the brain, liver, adrenal gland, kidney, bone, or to a lymph node that is not near the lung. Stage IVB:EnlargeStage IVB lung cancer. The cancer has spread to multiple places in one or more organs that are not near the lung, such as the brain, adrenal gland, kidney, liver, distant lymph nodes, or bone.Cancer has spread to multiple places in one or more organs that are not near the lung. The tumor may be any size and cancer may have spread to the lymph nodes. One or more of the following is found: There are one or more tumors in the lung that does not have the primary tumor. Cancer is found in the lining around the lungs or the sac around the heart. Cancer is found in fluid around the lungs or the heart. Cancer has spread to one place in an organ not near the lung, such as the brain, liver, adrenal gland, kidney, bone, or to a lymph node that is not near the lung. Cancer has spread to multiple places in one or more organs that are not near the lung. The cancer may come back in the brain, lung, or other parts of the body. There are different types of treatment for patients with non-small cell lung cancer. The following types of treatment are used:Surgery Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Targeted therapyImmunotherapyLaser therapyPhotodynamic therapy (PDT)CryosurgeryElectrocautery New types of treatment are being tested in
		  clinical trials.  RadiosensitizersNew combinations Treatment for non-small cell lung cancer may cause side effects. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Follow-up tests may be needed. Surgery Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Targeted therapy Immunotherapy Laser therapy Photodynamic therapy (PDT) Cryosurgery Electrocautery Radiosensitizers New combinations Different types of treatments are available for patients with non-small cell lung cancer. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the  standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Four types of surgery are used to treat lung cancer: Wedge resection:
				Surgery to remove  a tumor and some of the normal tissue around it. When a slightly larger amount of tissue is taken, it is called a segmental resection.EnlargeWedge resection of the lung. Part of the lung lobe containing the cancer and a small amount of healthy tissue around it is removed. Lobectomy:
				Surgery to remove a whole lobe (section) of the lung.EnlargeLobectomy. A lobe of the lung is removed. Pneumonectomy:
				Surgery to remove one whole lung.EnlargePneumonectomy. The whole lung is removed. Sleeve resection: Surgery to remove part of the bronchus. After the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen 
         at the time of the surgery, some patients may be given 
         chemotherapy or radiation therapy after surgery to kill any 
         cancer cells that are left. Treatment given after the surgery, 
         to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant 
         therapy. Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing.  There are two types of radiation therapy: External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the area of the body with cancer. Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. Stereotactic body radiation therapy is a type of external radiation therapy. Special equipment is used to place the patient in the same position for each radiation treatment. Once a day for several days, a radiation machine aims a larger than usual dose of radiation directly at the tumor. By having the patient in the same position for each treatment, there is less damage to nearby healthy tissue. This procedure is also called stereotactic external-beam radiation therapy and stereotaxic radiation therapy. Stereotactic radiosurgery is a type of external radiation therapy used to treat lung cancer that has spread to the brain. A rigid head frame is attached to the skull to keep the head still during the radiation treatment. A machine aims a single large dose of radiation directly at the tumor in the brain. This procedure does not involve surgery. It is also called stereotaxic radiosurgery, radiosurgery, and radiation surgery. For tumors in the airways, radiation is given directly to the tumor through an endoscope. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated.
It also depends on where the cancer is found.  External and internal radiation therapy are used to treat non-small cell lung cancer. Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing.  When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy).  When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen,  the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. For more information, see Drugs Approved for  Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells.  Monoclonal antibodies, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors, and KRAS G12C inhibitors  are four types of targeted therapy being used to treat advanced, metastatic, or recurrent non-small cell lung cancer. Monoclonal antibodies Monoclonal antibodies are immune system proteins made in the laboratory to treat many diseases, including cancer. As a cancer treatment, these antibodies can attach to a specific target on cancer cells or other cells that may help cancer cells grow. The antibodies are able to then kill the cancer cells, block their growth, or keep them from spreading. Monoclonal antibodies are given by infusion. They may be used alone or to carry drugs, toxins, or radioactive material directly to cancer cells. There are different types of monoclonal antibody therapy: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitor therapy: Cancer cells make a substance called VEGF,  which causes new blood vessels to form (angiogenesis) and helps the cancer grow. VEGF inhibitors block VEGF and stop new blood vessels from forming. This may kill cancer cells because they need new blood vessels to grow. Bevacizumab and ramucirumab are VEGF inhibitors and angiogenesis inhibitors. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor therapy: EGFRs are proteins found on the surface of certain cells, including cancer cells. Epidermal growth factor attaches to the EGFR on the surface of the cell and causes the cells to grow and divide. EGFR inhibitors block the receptor and stop the epidermal growth factor from attaching to the cancer cell. This stops the cancer cell from growing and dividing. Cetuximab and necitumumab are EGFR inhibitors. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors Tyrosine kinase inhibitors are small-molecule drugs that go through the cell membrane and work inside cancer cells to block signals that cancer cells need to grow and divide. Some tyrosine kinase inhibitors also have angiogenesis inhibitor effects. There are different types of tyrosine kinase inhibitors: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors: EGFRs are proteins found on the surface and inside certain cells, including cancer cells. Epidermal growth factor attaches to the EGFR  inside the cell and sends signals to the tyrosine kinase area of the cell, which tells the cell to grow and divide. EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors stop these signals and stop the cancer cell from growing and dividing. Erlotinib, gefitinib, afatinib, osimertinib, dacomitinib, and amivantamab are types of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Some of these drugs work better when there is also a mutation (change) in the EGFR gene. Kinase inhibitors that affect cells with certain gene changes:Dabrafenib is used to stop proteins being made by the BRAF gene.Trametinib is used to stop proteins being made by the MEK gene.Crizotinib and entrectinib are used to stop proteins from being made by the ALK and ROS1 genes. Ceritinib, alectinib, brigatinib, and lorlatinib are used to stop proteins from being made by the ALK gene.Larotrectinib and entrectinib are  used to stop proteins being made by NTRK1, NTRK2,  and NTRK3 gene fusions.Selpercatinib and pralsetinib are used to stop proteins being made by the RET fusion gene or the mutated RET gene.Tepotinib and  capmatinib are used to stop proteins being made by the mutated MET gene. Dabrafenib is used to stop proteins being made by the BRAF gene. Trametinib is used to stop proteins being made by the MEK gene. Crizotinib and entrectinib are used to stop proteins from being made by the ALK and ROS1 genes. Ceritinib, alectinib, brigatinib, and lorlatinib are used to stop proteins from being made by the ALK gene. Larotrectinib and entrectinib are  used to stop proteins being made by NTRK1, NTRK2,  and NTRK3 gene fusions. Selpercatinib and pralsetinib are used to stop proteins being made by the RET fusion gene or the mutated RET gene. Tepotinib and  capmatinib are used to stop proteins being made by the mutated MET gene. Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors mTOR inhibitors block a protein called mTOR, which may keep cancer cells from growing and prevent the growth of new blood vessels that tumors need to grow. Everolimus is a type of mTOR inhibitor. KRAS G12C inhibitors KRAS G12C inhibitors block a protein called KRAS p.G12C, which may help keep cancer cells from growing and may kill them. Sotorasib and adagrasib are  types of KRAS G12C inhibitors. For more information, see Drugs Approved for  Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. Immunotherapy is a treatment that uses the patient's immune system to fight cancer.  Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the body's natural defenses against cancer. Immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy is a type of immunotherapy used to treat some patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Types of immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy include: PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibitor therapy: PD-1 is a protein on the surface of T cells that helps keep the body's immune responses in check. PD-L1 is a protein found on some types of cancer cells. When PD-1 attaches to PD-L1, it stops the T cell from killing the cancer cell. PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibitors keep PD-1 and PD-L1 proteins from attaching to each other. This allows the T cells to kill cancer cells. Pembrolizumab, nivolumab,  and cemiplimab are types of PD-1 inhibitors. Atezolizumab and durvalumab are types of PD-L1 inhibitors.EnlargeImmune checkpoint inhibitor. Checkpoint proteins, such as PD-L1 on tumor cells and PD-1 on T cells, help keep immune responses in check. The binding of PD-L1 to PD-1 keeps T cells from killing tumor cells in the body (left panel). Blocking the binding of PD-L1 to PD-1 with an immune checkpoint inhibitor (anti-PD-L1 or anti-PD-1) allows the T cells to kill tumor cells (right panel). CTLA-4 inhibitor therapy: CTLA-4 is a protein on the surface of T cells that helps keep the body's immune responses in check. When CTLA-4 attaches to another protein called B7 on a cancer cell, it stops the T cell from killing the cancer cell. CTLA-4 inhibitors attach to CTLA-4 and allow the T cells to kill cancer cells. Tremelimumab is a type of CTLA-4 inhibitor. EnlargeImmune checkpoint inhibitor. Checkpoint proteins, such as B7-1/B7-2 on antigen-presenting cells (APC) and CTLA-4 on T cells, help keep the body’s immune responses in check. When the T-cell receptor (TCR) binds to antigen and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins on the APC and CD28 binds to B7-1/B7-2 on the APC, the T cell can be activated. However, the binding of B7-1/B7-2 to CTLA-4 keeps the T cells in the inactive state so they are not able to kill tumor cells in the body (left panel). Blocking the binding of B7-1/B7-2 to CTLA-4 with an immune checkpoint inhibitor (anti-CTLA-4 antibody) allows the T cells to be active and to kill tumor cells (right panel). For more information, see Drugs Approved for  Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. Laser therapy is a
			  cancer treatment that uses a laser beam (a narrow beam of intense light) to kill cancer cells. Photodynamic therapy
			 (PDT) is a cancer treatment that uses a drug and a certain type of laser light to kill cancer cells. A drug that is not active until it is exposed to light is injected into a vein. The drug collects more in cancer cells than in normal cells. Fiberoptic tubes are then used to carry the laser light to the cancer cells, where the drug  becomes active and kills the cells. Photodynamic therapy causes little damage to healthy tissue. It is  used mainly to treat tumors  on or just under the skin or in the lining of internal organs. When the tumor is in the airways, PDT is given directly to the tumor through an endoscope. Cryosurgery is a treatment that uses an instrument to freeze and destroy abnormal tissue, such as carcinoma in  situ. This type of treatment is also called cryotherapy. For tumors in the airways, cryosurgery is done through an endoscope. Electrocautery is a treatment that uses a probe or needle heated by an electric current to destroy abnormal tissue. For tumors in the airways, electrocautery is done through an endoscope. This summary section describes treatments          that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment  being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Radiosensitizers are substances that make tumor cells easier to kill with radiation therapy. The combination of chemotherapy and radiation therapy given with a radiosensitizer is  being studied in the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer. New combinations of treatments are being studied in clinical
			 trials. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, visit our Side Effects page. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer  treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first  to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. As you go through treatment, you  will have follow-up tests or checkups. Some tests that were done to diagnose or stage the cancer may be repeated to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of occult non-small cell lung cancer depends on the stage of the disease. Occult tumors are often found at an early stage (the tumor is in the lung only) and sometimes can be cured by surgery. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of stage 0 may include the
		  following: Surgery (wedge resection or segmental resection). Photodynamic
			 therapy, electrocautery, cryosurgery, or laser surgery for tumors in or near the bronchus. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of stage IA non-small cell lung cancer and stage IB non-small cell lung cancer may include the following: Surgery (wedge resection, segmental resection, sleeve resection, or lobectomy). Surgery followed by targeted therapy with an EGFR  tyrosine kinase inhibitor,  such as osimertinib. External radiation therapy, including stereotactic body radiation therapy for patients who cannot have surgery or choose not to have surgery. A clinical trial of chemotherapy or radiation therapy following surgery. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of stage IIA non-small cell lung cancer and stage IIB non-small cell lung cancer may include the following: Surgery (wedge resection, segmental resection, sleeve resection, lobectomy, or pneumonectomy). Surgery followed by chemotherapy. Surgery followed by targeted therapy with an EGFR  tyrosine kinase inhibitor,  such as osimertinib. Surgery followed by immunotherapy, such as atezolizumab. Surgery followed by radiation therapy. Chemotherapy followed by surgery. Immunotherapy, such as nivolumab, and chemotherapy followed by surgery. External radiation therapy for patients who cannot have surgery. A clinical trial of radiation therapy following surgery. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of stage IIIA non-small cell
		  lung cancer that can be removed with surgery may include the following: Chemotherapy followed by surgery. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy followed by surgery. Immunotherapy, such as nivolumab, and chemotherapy followed by surgery. Surgery followed by chemotherapy. Surgery followed by targeted therapy with an EGFR  tyrosine kinase inhibitor,  such as osimertinib. Surgery followed by immunotherapy, such as atezolizumab. Surgery followed by chemotherapy combined with radiation therapy. Surgery followed by radiation therapy. A clinical trial of new combinations of treatments. Treatment of stage IIIA non-small cell lung cancer that cannot be removed with surgery may include the following: Chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy followed by immunotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor, such as durvalumab. External radiation therapy alone. Internal radiation therapy or laser surgery, as palliative treatment to relieve symptoms and improve         the quality of life. For more information about supportive care for signs and symptoms including  cough, shortness of breath, and chest pain, see  Cardiopulmonary Syndromes. Non-small cell lung cancer of the superior sulcus, often called Pancoast tumor, begins in the upper part of the lung and spreads to nearby tissues such as the chest wall, large blood vessels, and spine. Treatment of Pancoast tumors may include the following: Surgery. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy followed by surgery. Radiation therapy alone. A clinical trial of new combinations of treatments. Some stage IIIA non-small cell lung tumors that have grown into the chest wall may be completely removed. Treatment of chest wall tumors may include the following: Surgery. Surgery and radiation therapy. Radiation therapy alone. Chemotherapy combined with radiation therapy and/or surgery. A clinical trial of new combinations of treatments. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of stage IIIB non-small cell
		  lung cancer and stage IIIC non-small cell lung cancer may include the following: Chemotherapy followed by external radiation therapy. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy given over the same period of time. The radiation therapy dose may increase over time. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy given over the same period of time. Immunotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor, such as durvalumab, may be given before or after these treatments. External radiation therapy alone for patients who cannot be treated with chemotherapy. External radiation therapy as palliative therapy, to relieve symptoms and improve the quality of life. Laser therapy
			 and/or internal radiation
			 therapy to relieve symptoms and improve the quality of life. Clinical trials of new external radiation therapy schedules  and new types  of treatment. A clinical trial of chemotherapy and  radiation therapy combined with  a radiosensitizer. Clinical trials of targeted therapy combined with chemotherapy and radiation therapy. For more information about supportive care for signs and symptoms such as cough, shortness of breath, and chest pain, see the following PDQ summaries: Cardiopulmonary Syndromes Cancer Pain Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of 
		  newly diagnosed stage IV,
		   relapsed, and recurrent non-small cell lung cancer may include the following: Combination chemotherapy. Combination chemotherapy and  targeted therapy with a monoclonal antibody, such as bevacizumab, cetuximab, or necitumumab. Combination chemotherapy followed by more chemotherapy as maintenance therapy to help keep cancer from progressing. Targeted therapy with an EGFR  tyrosine kinase inhibitor,  such as osimertinib, dacomitinib, gefitinib, erlotinib, or afatinib. Targeted therapy with an ALK inhibitor, such as alectinib, lorlatinib, crizotinib, ceritinib, or brigatinib. Targeted therapy with a BRAF inhibitor or MEK inhibitor, such as dabrafenib or trametinib. Targeted therapy with crizotinib and entrectinib  to stop proteins from being made by the ALK and ROS1 genes. Targeted therapy with a NTRK inhibitor, such as larotrectinib or entrectinib. Targeted therapy with a RET inhibitor, such as selpercatinib or pralsetinib. Targeted therapy with a MET inhibitor, such as tepotinib or capmatinib. Immunotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor, such as pembrolizumab, cemiplimab, tremelimumab, or atezolizumab, with or without chemotherapy. Targeted therapy with an mTOR inhibitor, such as everolimus. Laser therapy
			 and/or internal radiation
			 therapy for tumors that are blocking the airways. External radiation therapy as palliative therapy, to relieve symptoms and improve the quality of life. Surgery to remove a second primary tumor. Surgery to remove cancer that has spread to the brain, followed by radiation therapy to the whole brain. Stereotactic radiosurgery for tumors that have spread to the brain and  cannot be treated with surgery. A clinical trial of new drugs and combinations of treatments. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of 
		  progressive stage IV,  relapsed, and recurrent non-small cell lung cancer may include the following: Chemotherapy. Targeted therapy with an EGFR  tyrosine kinase inhibitor,  such as erlotinib, gefitinib, afatinib, osimertinib, or amivantamab. Targeted therapy with an ALK inhibitor, such as crizotinib, ceritinib, alectinib,  brigatinib, or lorlatinib. Targeted therapy with a BRAF inhibitor or MEK inhibitor, such as dabrafenib or trametinib. Targeted therapy with crizotinib and entrectinib to stop  proteins from being made by the ALK and ROS1 genes. Targeted therapy with a NTRK inhibitor, such as larotrectinib or entrectinib. Targeted therapy with a RET inhibitor, such as selpercatinib or pralsetinib. Targeted therapy with a MET inhibitor, such as tepotinib or capmatinib. Targeted therapy with a KRAS G12C inhibitor, such as sotorasib or adagrasib. Targeted therapy with trastuzumab deruxtecan for HER2-positive cancers. Immunotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor, such as nivolumab, pembrolizumab, or atezolizumab. Targeted therapy with an mTOR inhibitor, such as everolimus. A clinical trial of new drugs and combinations of treatments. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For more information from the National Cancer Institute about  non-small cell lung cancer, see the following: Lung Cancer Home Page Lung Cancer Prevention Lung Cancer Screening Drugs Approved for  Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Targeted Therapy to Treat Cancer Immunotherapy to Treat Cancer Lasers to Treat Cancer Photodynamic Therapy for Cancer Cryosurgery to Treat Cancer Tobacco (includes help with quitting) Secondhand Smoke and Cancer For general cancer information and other resources from the National Cancer Institute, visit: About Cancer Staging Chemotherapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Radiation Therapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Coping with Cancer Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer For Survivors and Caregivers Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish. PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board. A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Adult Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/lung/patient/non-small-cell-lung-treatment-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389355] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online. Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Hollings Cancer Center - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/infrastructure/cancer-centers/find/muschollings
txt: Raymond N. DuBois, M.D., Ph.D., Director Charleston,       South Carolina Main: 843-792-0700 Visit Website The MUSC Hollings Cancer Center, founded in 1993, became an NCI-Designated Cancer Center in 2009 and is the state’s only designated cancer center. It is located within the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC), serving a population that is 75% rural and which includes some of the most medically underserved regions within the country. The center’s mission is to reduce the cancer burden in South Carolina and beyond through high-quality cancer care, clinical research, professional education, and community outreach programs. Hollings has a robust interdisciplinary research base that includes more than 110 physicians and basic and population scientists from five MUSC colleges across 20 academic departments. Since its opening, the cancer center has had significant growth in clinical and research facilities, patient care volume, and research funding, and has a clinical trial portfolio featuring more than 200 studies. Hollings uses the resources of MUSC, which is the largest academic medical center in South Carolina; the MUSC Health System, which owns and operates eight hospitals and 100 outreach sites across the state; the recently opened MUSC Shawn Jenkins Children’s Hospital, which has a dedicated pediatric oncology floor; and the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center. Hollings creates a collaborative environment which fosters research from basic concepts to clinical/community interventions. It supports interdisciplinary, innovative research through its four research programs: cancer biology, cancer immunology, developmental cancer therapeutics, and cancer control. The center also trains the next generation of basic, clinical, and prevention researchers through an array of graduate and postdoctoral training educational programs for MUSC students and health care providers. Additionally, Hollings has made many important contributions to cancer prevention, care, and clinical research: Making cancer clinical trials available to underserved populations through the Minority/Underserved NCI Community Oncology Research Program.  Collaborating with faculty at South Carolina State University, an historically black public university in Orangeburg, to form the NCI-supported South Carolina Cancer Disparities Research Center. This center focuses on translational cancer research to improve disparities in cancer treatment outcomes and educational opportunities to nurture diversity in the next generation of cancer researchers.  Pioneering the use of the IL-15 superagonist in combination with standard checkpoint inhibitors to improve immunotherapy treatment in lung cancer patients. This work led to a stage 3 clinical trial available at multiple cancer centers on a state and national level.  Leading an international team through an NCI-supported program project grant with the goal of shaping policy on the regulation of e-cigarettes.  Hollings Cancer Center is dedicated to a team-based, multidisciplinary approach to developing the latest technologies and best treatments for people with cancer. The center’s community outreach and engagement initiatives include providing educational outreach to local rural communities and a mobile health unit that provides digital mammography and other cancer screening services. Some of Hollings’s other services and initiatives include: Developing and piloting a program to encourage smoking cessation in people receiving inpatient cancer care to hospitals across South Carolina. After this program was implemented within the MUSC health system, significantly fewer patients receiving cancer treatment required inpatient readmittance for additional care.  Sponsoring a statewide, multipronged effort to increase South Carolina’s low HPV vaccination rates.  Supporting immunotherapy clinical trial efforts. MUSC Health pioneered CAR T-cell therapy in the state and is the only center in South Carolina with an adult and pediatric CAR T-cell immunotherapy program.  Advancing pioneering research in many types of blood and marrow transplants and serving as South Carolina’s primary facility for hematological cancer treatment.  Administering the state’s only pediatric blood and marrow transplant program.  *This profile was provided by the Hollings Cancer Center.  
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Managing Cancer Care - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/managing-care
txt: No matter what decisions you make about your cancer care, know that support is always available to help you manage your care. This section includes information about health care services, insurance options, advance directives, and using trusted resources when seeking print and online sources of health information.  Finding Cancer Care


If you have been diagnosed with cancer, finding cancer care, such as a cancer doctor and cancer center or hospital, for your cancer care is an important step to getting the best treatment possible. Learn tips for choosing a cancer doctor and cancer center or hospital to manage your cancer care. Also learn about finding health insurance and home care.  Managing Cancer Costs and Medical Information 


People with cancer and their families worry about how to pay for treatment. It can be very expensive, even when you have insurance. Learn ways to manage the costs of cancer care, how to save money on pain medicines, how to keep track of tests and treatments, and how to manage paperwork, bills, health insurance, and other records.  Advance Directives


Advance directives are legal documents that allow you to decide ahead of time what kind of medical care you want and who you want to make decisions for you if you're too ill to speak for yourself.  How to Find Cancer Resources You Can Trust


Some online sources can provide misleading or incorrect information. Learn to how to find cancer and other health information from trusted and credible sources.  If you have been diagnosed with cancer, finding cancer care, such as a cancer doctor and cancer center or hospital, for your cancer care is an important step to getting the best treatment possible. Learn tips for choosing a cancer doctor and cancer center or hospital to manage your cancer care. Also learn about finding health insurance and home care. People with cancer and their families worry about how to pay for treatment. It can be very expensive, even when you have insurance. Learn ways to manage the costs of cancer care, how to save money on pain medicines, how to keep track of tests and treatments, and how to manage paperwork, bills, health insurance, and other records. Advance directives are legal documents that allow you to decide ahead of time what kind of medical care you want and who you want to make decisions for you if you're too ill to speak for yourself. Some online sources can provide misleading or incorrect information. Learn to how to find cancer and other health information from trusted and credible sources.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Aromatherapy With Essential Oils - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/cam/patient/aromatherapy-pdq
txt:  Overview  Questions and Answers About Aromatherapy  Current Clinical Trials  About This PDQ Summary  General CAM Information  Evaluation of CAM Therapies  Questions to Ask Your Health Care Provider About CAM  To Learn More About CAM  Aromatherapy is the use of essential oils from plants (flowers, herbs, or trees) as therapy to improve physical, mental, and spiritual well-being (see Question 1). Aromatherapy  may be used with other complementary treatments, such as massage or acupuncture, as well as with standard medical treatments to manage symptoms caused by cancer or cancer treatment  (see Question 1). Essential oils are  most often used by inhaling them or by applying a diluted form of them to the skin (see Question 2). Aromatherapy research with cancer patients has studied the effect of essential oils on anxiety, nausea, vomiting, and other health-related conditions (see Question 4). Safety testing on essential oils has found very few side effects. Lavender and tea tree essential oils have been found to have some hormone-like effects  (see Question 5). Aromatherapy products do not need approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (see Question 6). What is aromatherapy?  Aromatherapy is the use of essential oils from plants to improve the mind, body, and spirit. It is used by patients with cancer to improve quality of life and  reduce stress, anxiety, pain, nausea, and vomiting caused by cancer and its treatment. Aromatherapy  is often used with other complementary treatments like massage therapy and acupuncture, as well as with standard medical treatments, for symptom management.Essential oils are the fragrant (aromatic) part found in  many plants, often under the surface of leaves, bark, or peel. The fragrance is released if the plant is crushed or a special steam process is used. There are many essential oils used in aromatherapy, including those from Roman chamomile,  geranium, lavender,  tea tree,     lemon,  ginger, cedarwood, and bergamot.  Each plant's essential oil has a different chemical make-up  that affects how it smells, how it is  absorbed, and how it  affects the body.Essential oils are very concentrated.   For example, it  takes about 220 pounds of lavender flowers to make about 1 pound of essential oil. The aroma of essential oils fades away quickly when left open to air.The chemical compounds in essential oils can change as they get older. Many essential oils do not have an expiration date. How is aromatherapy  given or taken?Aromatherapy is used in several ways. Indirect inhalation: The patient breathes in an essential oil by using a room diffuser, which spreads the essential oil through the air, or by placing drops  on a tissue or piece of cotton nearby.Direct inhalation: The patient breathes in an essential oil by using an individual inhaler made by floating essential oil drops on top of hot water.Massage: In aromatherapy massage, one or more essential oils is diluted into a carrier oil and massaged  into the skin.Essential oils may also be mixed with bath salts and lotions or applied to bandages. There are some essential oils used to treat  specific  conditions. However, the types of essential oils used and the ways they are combined vary, depending on the experience and training of the aromatherapist. Have any preclinical (laboratory or animal) studies  been done using    
	aromatherapy?
In laboratory studies, tumor cells are used to test a  substance to find out if it is likely to have any anticancer effects. In animal studies, tests are done to see if a drug, procedure, or treatment is safe and effective in animals. Laboratory and animal studies are done before a substance is tested in people.Laboratory and animal studies have tested the effects of essential oils. For information on laboratory and animal studies done using essential oils, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Aromatherapy With Essential Oils. Have any  clinical trials (research studies with people) of aromatherapy been done?Clinical  trials of aromatherapy have studied its use in the treatment of anxiety, nausea, vomiting, and other health-related conditions in cancer patients. No studies of aromatherapy used to treat cancer have been published in a peer-reviewed scientific journal.Studies of aromatherapy have shown mixed results. There have been some reports of improved mood, anxiety, sleep, nausea, and pain.  Other studies reported that aromatherapy showed no change in symptoms.Studies on anxiety and depressionA  trial of 103 cancer patients studied the effects of massage compared to  massage with Roman chamomile essential oil. Two weeks later, a decrease in anxiety and improved symptoms were noted in the group that had massage with essential oil. The group that had massage  only  did not have the same benefit.Another study of 58 patients with various cancers who completed six aromatherapy sessions showed a decrease in anxiety and depression compared with before the sessions began.A randomized controlled trial studied the effects of inhalation aromatherapy on anxiety during radiation therapy.  There were 313 patients randomly assigned to either lavender, bergamot, or cedarwood essential oils. There were no differences reported in depression or anxiety between the groups.Study on sleepNewly diagnosed patients with acute myeloid leukemia who were hospitalized to receive intensive chemotherapy inhaled an essential oil through a diffuser overnight for 3 weeks. Patients were given the choice of lavender, peppermint, or chamomile. Improvement was reported in sleep, tiredness, drowsiness, lack of appetite, depression, anxiety, and well-being.Study on dry mouthRadioactive iodine may cause damage to salivary glands. Increased saliva production during treatment may decrease damage to salivary glands. In a randomized controlled trial, patients who inhaled a mixture of lemon and ginger essential oils had increased saliva production compared with the placebo group.Studies on nausea and vomitingA study of inhaled ginger essential oil in women receiving chemotherapy for breast cancer somewhat decreased acute nausea, but did not lessen vomiting or chronic nausea.In a study of adult patients at the time of stem cell infusion, tasting or sniffing sliced oranges was more effective at reducing nausea, retching, and coughing  than inhaling an orange essential oil.Study on aromatherapy in childrenAromatherapy is used or claimed to be useful for a variety of  childhood symptoms and conditions.  When used safely, aromatherapy can help children feel calmer and sleep better.A study of aromatherapy inhaled by children and adolescents undergoing stem cell transplant infusions compared essential oil from the peel of  bergamot (a type of orange from trees grown in Italy) with a pleasant-smelling shampoo that did not contain essential oils. Bergamot oil is used in aromatherapy to relieve depression, anxiety, and poor digestion. The placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized trial in 37 children and adolescents found that aromatherapy was not effective in reducing nausea, anxiety, or pain.Studies on procedure-related symptomsWomen having breast biopsies were randomly assigned to receive lavender-sandalwood or orange-peppermint essential oil drops placed on a felt tab and attached to their hospital gown or to no scent on the felt tab. Women who received the lavender-sandalwood aromatherapy tab had less anxiety than women who received the orange-peppermint aromatherapy tab or no scent tab.In a study of inhaled lavender essential oil, eucalyptus essential oil, or no essential oil in cancer patients having needles inserted into a central venous port catheter, patients who inhaled lavender essential oil reported less pain.A randomized controlled trial compared aromatherapy, music therapy, a combination of both, or a placebo in women with breast cancer before and after they had a  mastectomy. The aromatherapy group received a mixture of  lavender, bergamot, and geranium essential oils, while the music group was given  a choice of music styles.  The combination of treatments was found to  be more effective  in lessening pain and anxiety than either treatment alone. Have any side effects or risks been reported from aromatherapy?Safety testing on essential oils shows very few side effects or risks when they are used as directed. Most essential oils have been approved  as ingredients in  food and fragrances and are labeled as GRAS (generally recognized as safe) by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Swallowing large amounts of essential oils is not recommended. Allergic reactions and  skin irritation may  occur when essential oils are in contact with the skin for long periods of time. Sun sensitivity may occur when citrus or other essential oils are applied to the skin before going out in the sun.Lavender and tea tree essential oils have been found to have effects similar to estrogen (female sex hormone) and  also block or decrease the effect  of androgens (male sex hormones). Applying lavender and tea tree essential oils to the skin over  a long period of time was linked in one study to breast growth in  boys who had not yet reached puberty. Is aromatherapy approved by the FDA for use as a cancer treatment in the United States?Aromatherapy products do not need FDA approval.Aromatherapy is not regulated by state law, and there is no licensing  required to practice aromatherapy in the United States. Practitioners often combine aromatherapy training with another field in which they are licensed, for example, massage therapy, nursing, acupuncture, or naturopathy.  The National Association for Holistic Aromatherapy (www.naha.org) and the Alliance of International Aromatherapists  (www.alliance-aromatherapists.org)    are two organizations that have national educational standards for aromatherapists.  A list of schools that offer certificate programs approved by NAHA can be found at https://naha.org/index.php/education/approved-schools/.The Canadian Federation of Aromatherapists (www.cfacanada.com) certifies aromatherapists in Canada.          For a list of international aromatherapy programs, see the International Federation of Aromatherapists website (www.ifaroma.org/). Aromatherapy is the use of essential oils from plants to improve the mind, body, and spirit. It is used by patients with cancer to improve quality of life and  reduce stress, anxiety, pain, nausea, and vomiting caused by cancer and its treatment. Aromatherapy  is often used with other complementary treatments like massage therapy and acupuncture, as well as with standard medical treatments, for symptom management. Essential oils are the fragrant (aromatic) part found in  many plants, often under the surface of leaves, bark, or peel. The fragrance is released if the plant is crushed or a special steam process is used. There are many essential oils used in aromatherapy, including those from Roman chamomile,  geranium, lavender,  tea tree,     lemon,  ginger, cedarwood, and bergamot.  Each plant's essential oil has a different chemical make-up  that affects how it smells, how it is  absorbed, and how it  affects the body. Essential oils are very concentrated.   For example, it  takes about 220 pounds of lavender flowers to make about 1 pound of essential oil. The aroma of essential oils fades away quickly when left open to air. The chemical compounds in essential oils can change as they get older. Many essential oils do not have an expiration date. Aromatherapy is used in several ways. Indirect inhalation: The patient breathes in an essential oil by using a room diffuser, which spreads the essential oil through the air, or by placing drops  on a tissue or piece of cotton nearby. Direct inhalation: The patient breathes in an essential oil by using an individual inhaler made by floating essential oil drops on top of hot water. Massage: In aromatherapy massage, one or more essential oils is diluted into a carrier oil and massaged  into the skin. Essential oils may also be mixed with bath salts and lotions or applied to bandages. There are some essential oils used to treat  specific  conditions. However, the types of essential oils used and the ways they are combined vary, depending on the experience and training of the aromatherapist. In laboratory studies, tumor cells are used to test a  substance to find out if it is likely to have any anticancer effects. In animal studies, tests are done to see if a drug, procedure, or treatment is safe and effective in animals. Laboratory and animal studies are done before a substance is tested in people. Laboratory and animal studies have tested the effects of essential oils. For information on laboratory and animal studies done using essential oils, see the Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies section of the health professional version of Aromatherapy With Essential Oils. Clinical  trials of aromatherapy have studied its use in the treatment of anxiety, nausea, vomiting, and other health-related conditions in cancer patients. No studies of aromatherapy used to treat cancer have been published in a peer-reviewed scientific journal. Studies of aromatherapy have shown mixed results. There have been some reports of improved mood, anxiety, sleep, nausea, and pain.  Other studies reported that aromatherapy showed no change in symptoms. Studies on anxiety and depression A  trial of 103 cancer patients studied the effects of massage compared to  massage with Roman chamomile essential oil. Two weeks later, a decrease in anxiety and improved symptoms were noted in the group that had massage with essential oil. The group that had massage  only  did not have the same benefit. Another study of 58 patients with various cancers who completed six aromatherapy sessions showed a decrease in anxiety and depression compared with before the sessions began. A randomized controlled trial studied the effects of inhalation aromatherapy on anxiety during radiation therapy.  There were 313 patients randomly assigned to either lavender, bergamot, or cedarwood essential oils. There were no differences reported in depression or anxiety between the groups. Study on sleep Newly diagnosed patients with acute myeloid leukemia who were hospitalized to receive intensive chemotherapy inhaled an essential oil through a diffuser overnight for 3 weeks. Patients were given the choice of lavender, peppermint, or chamomile. Improvement was reported in sleep, tiredness, drowsiness, lack of appetite, depression, anxiety, and well-being. Study on dry mouth Radioactive iodine may cause damage to salivary glands. Increased saliva production during treatment may decrease damage to salivary glands. In a randomized controlled trial, patients who inhaled a mixture of lemon and ginger essential oils had increased saliva production compared with the placebo group. Studies on nausea and vomiting A study of inhaled ginger essential oil in women receiving chemotherapy for breast cancer somewhat decreased acute nausea, but did not lessen vomiting or chronic nausea. In a study of adult patients at the time of stem cell infusion, tasting or sniffing sliced oranges was more effective at reducing nausea, retching, and coughing  than inhaling an orange essential oil. Study on aromatherapy in children Aromatherapy is used or claimed to be useful for a variety of  childhood symptoms and conditions.  When used safely, aromatherapy can help children feel calmer and sleep better. A study of aromatherapy inhaled by children and adolescents undergoing stem cell transplant infusions compared essential oil from the peel of  bergamot (a type of orange from trees grown in Italy) with a pleasant-smelling shampoo that did not contain essential oils. Bergamot oil is used in aromatherapy to relieve depression, anxiety, and poor digestion. The placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized trial in 37 children and adolescents found that aromatherapy was not effective in reducing nausea, anxiety, or pain. Studies on procedure-related symptoms Women having breast biopsies were randomly assigned to receive lavender-sandalwood or orange-peppermint essential oil drops placed on a felt tab and attached to their hospital gown or to no scent on the felt tab. Women who received the lavender-sandalwood aromatherapy tab had less anxiety than women who received the orange-peppermint aromatherapy tab or no scent tab. In a study of inhaled lavender essential oil, eucalyptus essential oil, or no essential oil in cancer patients having needles inserted into a central venous port catheter, patients who inhaled lavender essential oil reported less pain. A randomized controlled trial compared aromatherapy, music therapy, a combination of both, or a placebo in women with breast cancer before and after they had a  mastectomy. The aromatherapy group received a mixture of  lavender, bergamot, and geranium essential oils, while the music group was given  a choice of music styles.  The combination of treatments was found to  be more effective  in lessening pain and anxiety than either treatment alone. Safety testing on essential oils shows very few side effects or risks when they are used as directed. Most essential oils have been approved  as ingredients in  food and fragrances and are labeled as GRAS (generally recognized as safe) by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Swallowing large amounts of essential oils is not recommended. Allergic reactions and  skin irritation may  occur when essential oils are in contact with the skin for long periods of time. Sun sensitivity may occur when citrus or other essential oils are applied to the skin before going out in the sun. Lavender and tea tree essential oils have been found to have effects similar to estrogen (female sex hormone) and  also block or decrease the effect  of androgens (male sex hormones). Applying lavender and tea tree essential oils to the skin over  a long period of time was linked in one study to breast growth in  boys who had not yet reached puberty. Aromatherapy products do not need FDA approval. Aromatherapy is not regulated by state law, and there is no licensing  required to practice aromatherapy in the United States. Practitioners often combine aromatherapy training with another field in which they are licensed, for example, massage therapy, nursing, acupuncture, or naturopathy. The National Association for Holistic Aromatherapy (www.naha.org) and the Alliance of International Aromatherapists  (www.alliance-aromatherapists.org)    are two organizations that have national educational standards for aromatherapists.  A list of schools that offer certificate programs approved by NAHA can be found at https://naha.org/index.php/education/approved-schools/. The Canadian Federation of Aromatherapists (www.cfacanada.com) certifies aromatherapists in Canada.          For a list of international aromatherapy programs, see the International Federation of Aromatherapists website (www.ifaroma.org/). Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish. PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the use of aromatherapy with essential oils in the treatment of people with cancer.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Integrative, Alternative, and Complementary Therapies Editorial Board. A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Integrative, Alternative, and Complementary Therapies Editorial Board. PDQ Aromatherapy With Essential Oils. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/cam/patient/aromatherapy-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389261] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online. Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us. Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM)—also called integrative medicine—includes a broad range of healing philosophies, approaches, and therapies. A therapy is generally called complementary when it is used in addition to conventional treatments; it is often called alternative when it is used instead of conventional treatment. (Conventional treatments are those that are widely accepted and practiced by the mainstream medical community.) Depending on how they are used, some therapies can be considered either complementary or alternative. Complementary and alternative therapies are used in an effort to prevent illness, reduce stress, prevent or reduce side effects and symptoms, or control or cure disease. Unlike conventional treatments for cancer, complementary and alternative therapies are often not covered by insurance companies. Patients should check with their insurance provider to find out about coverage for complementary and alternative therapies. Cancer patients considering complementary and alternative therapies should discuss this decision with their doctor, nurse, or pharmacist as they would any type of treatment. Some complementary and alternative therapies may affect their standard treatment or may be harmful when used with conventional treatment. It is important that the same scientific methods used to test conventional therapies are used to test CAM therapies. The National Cancer Institute  and the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) are sponsoring a number of clinical trials (research studies) at medical centers to test CAM therapies for use in cancer. Conventional approaches to cancer treatment have generally been studied for safety and effectiveness through a scientific process that includes clinical trials with large numbers of patients. Less is known about the safety and effectiveness of complementary and alternative methods. Few CAM therapies have been tested using demanding scientific methods. A small number of CAM therapies that were thought to be purely alternative approaches are now being used in cancer treatment—not as cures, but as complementary therapies that may help patients feel better and recover faster. One example is acupuncture. According to a panel of experts at a National Institutes of Health (NIH) meeting  in November 1997, acupuncture has been found to help control nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy and pain related to surgery. However, some approaches, such as the use of laetrile, have been studied and found not to work and to possibly cause harm. The NCI Best Case Series Program   which was started  in 1991, is one way CAM approaches that are being used in practice are being studied. The program is overseen by the NCI’s Office of Cancer Complementary and Alternative Medicine (OCCAM). Health care professionals who offer alternative cancer therapies submit their patients’ medical records and related materials to OCCAM. OCCAM carefully reviews these materials to see if any seem worth further research. When considering complementary and alternative therapies, patients should ask their health care provider the following questions: What side effects can be expected? What are the risks related to this therapy? What benefits can be expected from this therapy? Do the known benefits outweigh the risks? Will the therapy affect conventional treatment? Is this therapy part of a clinical trial? If so, who is the sponsor of the trial? Will the therapy be covered by health insurance? National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) The National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) facilitates research and evaluation of complementary and alternative practices, and provides information about a variety of approaches to health professionals and the public. NCCIH Clearinghouse Post Office Box 7923 Gaithersburg, MD 20898–7923 Telephone: 1-888-644-6226 (toll free) TTY (for deaf and hard of hearing callers): 1-866-464-3615 E-mail: info@nccih.nih.gov Website:  https://nccih.nih.gov CAM on PubMed NCCIH and the NIH National Library of Medicine (NLM) jointly developed CAM on PubMed, a free and easy-to-use search tool for finding CAM-related journal citations. As a subset of the NLM's PubMed bibliographic database, CAM on PubMed features more than 230,000 references and abstracts for CAM-related articles from scientific journals. This database also provides links to the websites of over 1,800 journals, allowing users to view full-text articles. (A subscription or other fee may be required to access full-text articles.) Office of Cancer Complementary and Alternative Medicine The NCI Office of Cancer Complementary and Alternative Medicine (OCCAM) coordinates the activities of the NCI in the area of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM). OCCAM supports CAM cancer research and provides information about cancer-related CAM to health providers and the general public via the NCI website. National Cancer Institute (NCI) Cancer Information Service U.S. residents may call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, toll free at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237) Monday through Friday from 9:00 am to 9:00 pm. A trained Cancer Information Specialist is available to answer your questions. Food and Drug Administration The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulates drugs and medical devices to ensure that they are safe and effective. Food and Drug Administration 10903 New Hampshire Avenue Silver Spring, MD 20993 Telephone: 1-888-463-6332 (toll free) Website: http://www.fda.gov Federal Trade Commission The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) enforces consumer protection laws. Publications available from the FTC include: Who Cares: Sources of Information About Health Care Products and Services Fraudulent Health Claims: Don’t Be Fooled Consumer Response Center Federal Trade Commission 600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington, DC 20580 Telephone: 1-877-FTC-HELP (1-877-382-4357) (toll free) TTY (for deaf and  hard of hearing callers): 202-326-2502 Website: http://www.ftc.gov
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NCI Cancer Clinical Trials Search API - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/syndication/api
txt: NCI is redesigning the way patients and oncologists find information and learn about cancer clinical trials by making NCI-supported cancer clinical trials available through an application programming interface (API). An API helps translate large amounts of data in meaningful ways and is primarily used to allow two computer applications to talk to each other in a common language that they both understand. This Clinical Trials Search API will enable the community—advocacy groups, academia, and others in the cancer clinical trials ecosystem—to build applications, integrations, search tools, and digital platforms tailored to individual communities that bring clinical trial information to more providers, patients, and their family members. NCI's clinical trial search is now powered by the Clinical Trials Search API and allows NCI to begin providing better search results. The information made publicly available by the Clinical Trials Search API draws from the Clinical Trials Reporting Program (CTRP) database. This CTRP information does not include regulatory information such as IRB approval details, IND/IDE information, NCI-specific Data Table 4 information, or biomarker data. In addition, no accrual information, patient-level or summary, is made public. Documentation for developers can be found on https://clinicaltrialsapi.cancer.gov. NCI wants to hear your ideas or comments on how we can improve the API in future versions. To give us feedback on the Clinical Trials Search API, or if you have any questions, please contact ctrp_support@mail.nih.gov.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Desmoplastic Small Round Cell Tumors (DSRCT) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/pediatric-adult-rare-tumor/rare-tumors/rare-soft-tissue-tumors/desmoplastic-small-round-cell-tumors
txt: You can help speed up the development of new treatments by giving researchers the tools they need. Desmoplastic small round cell tumors, or DSRCT, are tumors that grow in the abdomen and pelvic area of the body. Desmoplastic small round cell tumors are a type of soft tissue sarcoma, which is a type of cancer that forms in the connective tissue of the body. Connective tissues include fat, muscles, tendons, lymph and blood vessels, and nerves. DSRCT is very rare. DSRCT occurs most often in young white males between the ages of 10 and 30. Some reports say that only about 200 cases of DSRCT have been recorded since the cancer was first described in 1989. Many people with DSRCT do not have symptoms when the cancer first starts. Later, when the tumors get larger, symptoms can include: Pain  Nausea and vomiting  Diarrhea  Constipation  Swelling in the abdomen  Imaging: If you have symptoms of DSRCT, your doctor will use imaging scans such as ultrasound, CT, MRI, and PET, to look at where the tumors are and how big they are. They will also check for signs that the tumor has spread to other parts of the body. Biopsy: To check if the tumor is DSRCT your doctor will do a biopsy, taking a small sample from the tumor with a needle. An expert, called a pathologist, will study cells from the sample under the microscope to see what kind of tumor it is. Under a microscope, DSRCT cells look round. The pathologist might also check for a protein called EWS-WT1 that this type of tumor makes. There is currently no standard of care for DSRCT because it is so rare. However, there are some treatment options. Surgery: Surgery is used to remove as much of the DSRCT as possible. If some cancer cells are left behind, the cancer can come back in the same spot or a different part of the body. Chemotherapy: When the tumors are large, or the cancer cells have spread to other parts of the body, chemotherapy is used along with surgery. Hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC): This treatment washes the inside of the abdomen with warm chemotherapy drugs. This procedure lasts about two hours. HIPEC can be done along with surgery. The chemotherapy kills the tumor cells in the abdomen without exposing the rest of the body to the drugs, which can cause side effects. Radiation Therapy: Radiation therapy uses radiation to kill the cancer cells. External radiation therapy comes from a machine that aims radiation at the tumors. For internal radiation therapy, seeds, ribbons, or capsules that contain a radiation source are placed in your body, in or near the tumor. We do not know if it runs in families because there are so few people with DSRCT. We know that in DSRCT, chromosomes (the structures in your cells that contain all of your genes) break apart and get put back together in the wrong way. This can cause cells to not function like they should. In DSRCT, a gene called EWS wrongly joins with a region called WT1. Doctors will look for this change in chromosomes to confirm that your cancer is DSRCT. The estimate of how a disease will affect you long-term is called prognosis. Every person is different and prognosis will depend on many factors, such as Where the tumor is in your body  If the cancer has spread to other parts of your body  How much of the tumor was taken out during surgery  If you want information on your prognosis, it is important to talk to your doctor. NCI also has resources to help you understand your prognosis. The five-year survival rate for DSRCT is 15%.  Keep in mind that doctors estimate DSRCT survival rates by how groups of people with DSRCT have done in the past. Because there are so few people with DSRCT, these rates may not be very accurate. 
It is very important to work with a team of experts as soon as possible after diagnosis with DSRCT to improve your chances of survival. You can contact MyPART for help connecting with experts.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Nausea and Vomiting Related to Cancer Treatment - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/nausea/nausea-pdq
txt:  General Information  Causes  Anticipatory Nausea and Vomiting  Acute or Delayed Nausea and Vomiting  Treating Nausea and Vomiting Without Drugs  Treatment-Related Nausea and Vomiting in Children  To Learn More About Nausea and Vomiting  About This PDQ Summary  Nausea and vomiting are serious side effects of cancer therapy. It is important that nausea and vomiting are controlled   so that   the patient can continue treatment and have a better quality of  life. Different types of nausea and vomiting are caused by chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and other conditions. Nausea  and vomiting are side effects of cancer therapy and affect most patients who have chemotherapy. Radiation therapy to the brain, gastrointestinal tract, or liver also cause nausea and vomiting. Nausea is an unpleasant feeling in the back of the throat and/or
stomach that may come and go in waves. It may occur before vomiting.  Vomiting is throwing up   the contents of the stomach through the mouth.  Retching is the
movement of the stomach and esophagus without vomiting and is also called dry
heaves.  Although treatments for nausea and vomiting have improved, nausea and vomiting are still serious side effects of cancer therapy because they cause  the patient distress and may cause other health problems.  Patients may have nausea more than vomiting. Nausea is
controlled by a part of the autonomic nervous system which controls involuntary body
functions (such as breathing or digestion).  Vomiting is a reflex controlled in part by a vomiting center in the brain. 
Vomiting can be triggered by  smell, taste, anxiety,
pain, motion, or changes in the body caused by inflammation, poor blood flow, or irritation to the stomach. It is very important to prevent and control nausea and vomiting in patients with cancer, so that they can continue  treatment and  perform  activities of daily life. Nausea and vomiting that are not controlled can cause the following: Chemical changes in the body. Mental changes. Loss of appetite. Malnutrition. Dehydration. A torn esophagus. Broken bones. Reopening of surgical wounds. Nausea and vomiting can occur before, during, or after treatment. The types of nausea and vomiting include: Acute: Nausea and vomiting that happen within 24 hours after  treatment starts. Delayed: Nausea and vomiting that happen more than 24 hours after chemotherapy. This is also called late nausea and vomiting. Anticipatory: Nausea and vomiting that happen before a chemotherapy treatment begins. If a patient has had nausea and vomiting after an earlier chemotherapy session, he or she may have anticipatory nausea and vomiting before the next treatment. This usually begins after the third or fourth treatment. The smells, sights, and sounds of the treatment room may remind the patient of previous times and may trigger nausea and vomiting before the chemotherapy session has even begun. Breakthrough: Nausea and vomiting that happen within 5 days after getting antinausea treatment.  Different  drugs or doses are needed to prevent more nausea and vomiting. Refractory: Nausea and vomiting that does not respond to drugs. Chronic: Nausea and vomiting that lasts for a period of time after treatment ends. Many factors  increase the risk of nausea and vomiting with chemotherapy. Radiation therapy may also cause nausea and vomiting. Other conditions may also increase the risk of nausea and vomiting in patients with advanced cancer. Nausea
and vomiting with chemotherapy are more likely if the patient: Is treated with certain chemotherapy drugs. Had severe or frequent periods of nausea and vomiting after past chemotherapy treatments. Is female. Is younger than 50 years. Had morning sickness or vomiting with a past pregnancy. Has a fluid and/or electrolyte imbalance (dehydration, too much calcium in the blood, or too much fluid in the body's tissues). Has a tumor in the gastrointestinal tract, liver, or brain. Has constipation. Is receiving certain drugs, such as opioids (pain medicine). Has an infection, including an infection in the blood. Has kidney disease. Patients who drank large amounts of alcohol over time have a lower risk of nausea and vomiting after being treated with chemotherapy. The following treatment factors  may affect the risk of nausea and vomiting: The part of the body where the radiation therapy is given. Radiation therapy to the gastrointestinal tract, liver, or brain, or whole body is likely to cause nausea and vomiting. The size of the area being treated. The dose of radiation. Receiving chemotherapy and radiation therapy at the same time. The following patient factors may cause nausea and vomiting with radiation therapy if the patient: Is younger than 55 years. Is female. Has anxiety. Had severe or frequent periods of nausea and vomiting after past chemotherapy or radiation therapy treatments. Patients who drank large amounts of alcohol over time have a lower risk of nausea and vomiting after being treated with radiation therapy. Nausea and vomiting may also be caused by other conditions. In patients with advanced cancer, chronic nausea and vomiting may be caused by the following: Brain tumors or pressure on the brain. Tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. High or low levels of certain substances in the blood. Medicines such as opioids. Anticipatory nausea and vomiting may occur after several chemotherapy treatments. The earlier that anticipatory nausea and vomiting is identified, the more effective treatment may be. In some patients, after they have had  several courses of 
treatment, nausea and vomiting may occur before a treatment session. This is called anticipatory nausea and vomiting.  It is caused by  triggers, such as
odors in the therapy room.  For example, a person who begins
chemotherapy and smells an alcohol swab at the same time may later have
nausea and vomiting at the smell of an alcohol swab. The more chemotherapy sessions a patient has, the more likely it is that anticipatory nausea and vomiting will occur. Having three or more of the following may make anticipatory nausea and vomiting more likely: Having  nausea and vomiting, or feeling warm or hot after the last chemotherapy session. Being younger than 50 years. Being female. A history of motion sickness. Having a high level of anxiety in certain situations. Other factors that may make anticipatory nausea and vomiting more likely include: Expecting to have nausea and vomiting before a chemotherapy treatment begins. Doses and types of chemotherapy (some are more likely to cause nausea and vomiting). Feeling dizzy or lightheaded after chemotherapy. How often chemotherapy is followed by nausea. Having delayed nausea and vomiting after chemotherapy. A history of morning sickness during pregnancy. When symptoms of anticipatory nausea and vomiting are diagnosed early, treatment is more likely to work. Psychologists and  other mental health professionals with special training  can often help patients with anticipatory  nausea and vomiting. The following types of treatment may be used: Muscle relaxation with guided imagery. Hypnosis. Behavior changing methods. Biofeedback. Distraction (such as playing video games). Antinausea drugs given for anticipatory nausea and vomiting do not seem to help. Acute and delayed nausea and vomiting are common in patients being treated with chemotherapy. Acute and delayed nausea and vomiting with chemotherapy or radiation therapy are usually treated with drugs. Chemotherapy is the most common  cause of nausea and vomiting that is related to cancer treatment. How often nausea and vomiting occur and how severe they are may be  affected by the following: The specific drug being given. The dose of the drug or if it is given with other drugs. How often the drug is given. The way the drug is given. The individual patient. The following may make acute or delayed nausea and vomiting with chemotherapy more likely if the patient: Had chemotherapy in the past. Had nausea and vomiting after previous chemotherapy sessions. Is dehydrated. Is malnourished. Had recent surgery. Received radiation therapy. Is female. Is younger than 50 years. Has a history of motion sickness. Has a history of morning sickness during pregnancy. Patients who have acute nausea and vomiting with chemotherapy are more likely to have delayed nausea and vomiting as well. Drugs may  be given before each treatment, to prevent  nausea and vomiting. After chemotherapy, drugs may be given to prevent delayed vomiting. Patients who are given chemotherapy several days in a row may need treatment for both acute and delayed nausea and vomiting. Some
drugs last only a short time in the body and need to be given more often. Others last a long time and are given less often. The following table shows drugs  that are commonly used to prevent nausea and
vomiting caused by chemotherapy and the type of drug. The following table shows drugs  that are commonly used to prevent nausea and
vomiting caused by radiation therapy and the type of drug: It is not known whether it is best to give antinausea medicine for the first 5 days of radiation treatment or for the full treatment course. Talk with your doctor about the treatment plan that is best for you. Treatment without drugs is sometimes used to control nausea and vomiting. Non-drug treatments may help relieve nausea and vomiting,  and may 
help  antinausea drugs work better. These treatments include: Diet  changes (for more information, see the Nausea section in Nutrition in Cancer Care). Acupuncture   and acupressure (for more information, see Acupuncture). Relaxation methods such as guided imagery and hypnosis. Behavior therapy. Nausea and vomiting in children treated with chemotherapy is a serious problem. Anticipatory nausea and vomiting may occur in children. In children, acute nausea and vomiting is usually treated with drugs and other methods. Delayed nausea may be hard to detect in children. Like   adults, nausea in children receiving chemotherapy is more of a problem than vomiting. Children may have anticipatory, acute, and/or delayed nausea and vomiting. Children who have nausea and vomiting after a chemotherapy treatment may have the same symptoms before their next  treatment when the child sees, smells, or hears sounds from the treatment room. This is called anticipatory nausea and vomiting. When the child’s nausea and vomiting is well controlled during and after a chemotherapy treatment, the child may have less anxiety before the next treatment and less chance of having anticipatory symptoms. Health professionals caring for children who have anticipatory nausea and vomiting have found that children may benefit from: Hypnosis. Drugs used to treat anxiety in doses adjusted for the age and needs of the child. Drugs may be given before each treatment to prevent nausea and vomiting. After chemotherapy, drugs may be given to prevent delayed vomiting. Patients who are given chemotherapy several days in a row may need treatment for both acute and delayed nausea and vomiting. Some drugs last only a short time in the body and need to be given more often. Others last a long time and are given less often. The following table shows drugs that are commonly used to prevent nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy and the type of drug. Different types of drugs may be given together to treat acute and delayed nausea and vomiting. Non-drug treatments may help relieve nausea and vomiting, and may help antinausea drugs work better in children. These treatments include: Acupuncture. Acupressure. Guided imagery. Music therapy. Muscle relaxation training. Child and family support groups. Virtual reality games. Dietary support may include: Eating smaller meals more often. Avoiding food smells and other strong odors. Avoiding foods that are spicy, fatty, or highly salted. Eating "comfort foods" that have helped prevent nausea in the past. Taking antinausea drugs before meals. Unlike in adults, delayed nausea and vomiting in children may be harder for parents and caregivers to see. A change in the child’s eating pattern may be the only sign of a problem. In addition, most chemotherapy treatments for children are scheduled over several days. This makes the timing and risk of delayed nausea unclear. Studies on the prevention of delayed nausea and vomiting in children are limited. Children are usually treated the same way as adults, with doses of drugs that prevent nausea adjusted for age. For more information from the National Cancer Institute 
        about nausea and vomiting related to cancer treatment, see the following: Nausea and Vomiting in People with Cancer Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish. PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the causes and treatment of nausea and vomiting (emesis) (N&V).  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Supportive and Palliative Care Editorial Board. A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Supportive and Palliative Care Editorial Board. PDQ Nausea and Vomiting Related to Cancer Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/nausea/nausea-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389289] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online. Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Task Force Rosters - Gastrointestinal Steering Committee - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/ccct/steering-committees/nctn/gastrointestinal/task-force-rosters
txt: The Colon, Esophagogastric, Hepatobiliary, Neuroendocrine Tumors, Pancreas, and Rectal-Anal task forces of the NCI Gastrointestinal Steering Committee were established to provide a forum for in-depth discussion of clinical trial concepts, provide advisory input on trial design, and make recommendations for clinical trial planning meetings.  Colon Task Force  Esophagogastric Task Force  Hepatobiliary Task Force  Neuroendocrine Tumors (NET) Task Force  Pancreas Task Force  Rectal-Anal Task Force  Colon Task Force Esophagogastric Task Force Hepatobiliary Task Force Neuroendocrine Tumors (NET) Task Force Pancreas Task Force Rectal-Anal Task Force Colon Task Force Christopher Lieu, M.D.
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus
Aurora, CO Jonathan Loree, M.D., M.S., FRCPC
BC Cancer Vancouver Centre
Vancouver BC, Canada  Jared D. Acoba, M.D.
University of Hawai'i Cancer Center 
Honolulu, HI Nilofer S. Azad, M.D.
Johns Hopkins University Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center 
Baltimore, MD Michael Cecchini, M.D.
Yale University School of Medicine 
New Haven, CT Julie S. Clauer, M.B.A
Patient Advocate 
Burbank, CA Deirdre J. Cohen, M.D., M.S.
Mount Sinai Hospital
New York, NY Marwan Fakih, M.D.
City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center
Duarte, CA Belal Firwana, M.D., M.S.
BJC HealthCare
St. Louis, MO Vaia Florou, M.D., M.S.
University of Utah Huntsman Cancer Institute 
Salt Lake City, UT Phuong Gallagher
Patient Advocate 
Pasadena, CA Sepideh Gholami, M.D., M.A.S., FACS, FSSO
Northwell Health Cancer Institute 
New Hyde Park, NY Bruce Giantonio, M.D.
Massachusetts General Hospital  
Boston, MA Philip J. Gold, M.D.
Swedish Medical Center 
Seattle, WA Rachel Goodwin, M.D., FRCPC
University of Ottawa
Ottawa, ON, Canada Atif Iqbal, M.D., FACS, FACRS
Baylor College of Medicine
Houston, TX Audrey E. Kam, M.D.
Rush University Medical College 
Chicago, IL Dipen M. Maru, M.D.
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, TX Van K. Morris, M.D.
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, TX Bruno C. Odisio, M.D.
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, TX Fang-Shu Ou, Ph.D.
Mayo Clinic
Rochester, MN Michael J. Overman, M.D.
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, TX Aparna R. Parikh, M.D., M.S.
Massachusetts General Hospital 
Boston, MA Ibrahim H. Sahin, M.D.
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center  
Pittsburgh, PA Abdulazeez Salawu, M.B.B.S., Ph.D.
Mount Sinai Hospital Toronto  
Toronto, ON, Canada Mohamed Salem, M.D.
Atrium Health Levine Cancer Institute  
Charlotte, NC Hanna K. Sanoff, M.D., M.P.H.
University of North Carolina Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center 
Chapel Hill, NC Antonia Sepulveda, M.D., Ph.D..
George Washington University 
Washington DC Christina Wu, M.B. B.Ch.
Mayo Clinic
Phoenix, AZ Rona Yaeger, M.D.
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
New York, NY Jane Hettinger, Ph.D.jane.hettinger@nih.gov  Esophagogastric Task Force Samuel J. Klempner, M.D.
Massachusetts General Hospital
Boston, MA Nataliya V. Uboha, M.D., Ph.D.
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI  Mekhail Anwar, M.D., Ph.D.
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, CA Afsaneh Barzi, M.D., Ph.D.
City of Hope
Duarte, CA Paul J. Catalano, Sc.D.
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute 
Boston, MA Lynn DeGregorio
Patient Advocate 
North Salem, NY Dana Deighton
Patient Advocate 
Alexandria, VA Elena Elimova, M.D., M.Sc.
University of Toronto Princess Margaret Cancer Centre 
Toronto, ON, Canada Peter C. Enzinger, M.D.
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute   
Boston, MA Michael K. Gibson, M.D., Ph.D.
Vanderbilt University Ingram Cancer Center
Nashville, TN David Ilson, M.D., Ph.D.
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
New York, NY Syma Iqbal, M.D.
University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine
Los Angeles, CA Salma Jabbour, M.D.
Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey
New Brunswick, NJ Kaitlyn J. Kelly, M.D., M.A.S.
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI Maged F. Khalil, M.D.
Lehigh Valley Health Network 
Allentown, PA Lawrence R. Kleinberg, M.D.
Johns Hopkins University Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center  
Baltimore, MD Geoff Y. Ku, M.D.
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
New York, NY Sangjune Lee, M.D., FRCPC, DABR
University of Calgary Tom Baker Cancer Centre 
Calgary, AB, Canada Aamer Mahmud, M.D.
Queen's University School of Medicine
Kingston, ON, Canada Steven B. Maron, M.D., M.Sc.
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
New York, NY Rutika Mehta, M.D., M.P.H.
Moffitt Cancer Center 
Tampa, FL Daniela Molena, M.D.
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
New York, NY Haeseong Park, M.D., M.P.H.
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute 
Boston, MA Viktoriya Paroder, M.D., Ph.D.
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
New York, NY Lakshmi Rajdev, M.D., M.S.
Mount Sinai Hospital
New York, NY Hannah Roberts, M.D.
Massachusetts General Hospital
Boston, MA Manish A. Shah, M.D.
Cornell University Weill Cornell Medical College
New York, NY Gina M. Vaccaro, M.D.
Providence Cancer Institute 
Portland, OR Zev A. Wainberg, M.D.
University of California, Los Angeles 
Los Angeles, CA Kay Washington, M.D., Ph.D.
Vanderbilt University Medical Center 
Nashville, TN Jane Hettinger, Ph.D.jane.hettinger@nih.gov  Hepatobiliary Task Force Tanios S. Bekaii-Saab, M.D.
Mayo Clinic
Phoenix, AZ Milind Javle, M.D.
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, TX  Ghassan K. Abou-Alfa, M.D., M.B.A.
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
New York, NY Mitesh Borad, M.D.
Mayo Clinic
Phoenix, AZ Marinela Capanu, Ph.D.
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center  
New York, NY Sreenivasa R. Chandana, M.B.B.S., Ph.D.
Cancer & Hematology Centers of West Michigan
Grand Rapids, MI Ann-Lii Cheng, M.D., Ph.D.
National Taiwan University Hospital 
Taipei, Taiwan, Province of China Laura Dawson, M.D., FRCPC
University of Toronto Princess Margaret Cancer Centre 
Toronto, ON, Canada Anthony B. El-Khoueiry, M.D.
University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine
Los Angeles, CA Susan M. Geyer, Ph.D.
Mayo Clinic  
Rochester, MN Laura W. Goff, M.D.
Vanderbilt University Ingram Cancer Center  
Nashville, TN Gregory M. Heestand, M.D.
Stanford University School of Medicine  
Stanford, CA Julie K. Heimbach, M.D.
Mayo Clinic 
Rochester, MN Z. Ian Hu, M.D., Ph.D.
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Houston, TX Paul J. Karanicolas, M.D., Ph.D., FRCS(C), FACS
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre
Toronto, ON, Canada Thomas Karasic, M.D.
Abramson Cancer Center Perelman
Philadelphia, PA Ahmed O. Kaseb, M.D.
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, TX R. Kate Kelley, M.D.
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, CA Jennifer J. Knox, M.D., M.Sc., FRCPC
University of Toronto Princess Margaret Cancer Centre 
Toronto, ON, Canada Eugene J. Koay, M.D., Ph.D.
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Houston, TX Evan Lapinsky, M.D.
ChristianaCare Medical Oncology Hematology Consultants
Newark, DE Gregory B. Lesinski, Ph.D., M.P.H.
Emory University Winship Cancer Institute 
Atlanta, GA Armeen Mahvash, M.D.
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, TX Tim Meyer, M.B.B.S., Ph.D., FRCP
University College London
London, United Kingdom Bruno N. Nattero, M.D.
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile 
Santiago, Chile Do-Youn Oh, M.D., Ph.D.
Seoul National University College of Medicine
Seoul, South Korea Manisha Palta, M.D.
Duke University
Durham, NC Lorenza Rimassa, M.D.
IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital 
Milan, Italy Lourdes A. Rocha-Nussbaum, M.A.
Patient Advocate 
Golden, CO Sarah Schiltz
Patient Advocate 
Los Gatos, CA Aaron J. Scott, M.D.
University of Arizona Cancer Center
Tucson, AZ Rachna T. Shroff, M.D., M.S.
University of Arizona Cancer Center 
Tucson, AZ Amit Singal, M.D.
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center 
Dallas, TX Stacey M. Stein, M.D., M.M.S.
Yale University 
New Haven, CT Weijing Sun, M.D., FACP
The University of Kansas Medical Center 
Kansas City, KS Vincent C. Tam, M.D.
University of Calgary Arnie Charbonneau Cancer Institute  
Calgary, AB, Canada Leila T. Tchelebi, M.D.
Northern Westchester Hospital 
Mt. Kisco, NY Michael K. Yan, M.D., M.P.H.
University of Toronto Princess Margaret Cancer Centre
Toronto, ON, Canada Jane Hettinger, Ph.D.jane.hettinger@nih.gov  Neuroendocrine Tumors (NET) Task Force Simron Singh, M.D., M.P.H., FRCPC
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre 
Toronto, ON, Canada Heloisa P. Soares, M.D., Ph.D. 
University of Utah Huntsman Cancer Institute 
Salt Lake City, UT  Junaid Arshad, M.D.
University of Arizona Cancer Center  
Tucson, AZ Timothy Asmis, M.D., FRCPC
Ottawa Hospital Cancer Centre 
Ottawa, ON, Canada Lisa Bodei, M.D., Ph.D.
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center  
New York, NY Jennifer Chan, M.D., M.P.H.
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute 
Boston, MA Aman Chauhan, M.D.
University of Miami Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center 
Miami, FL N. Arvind Dasari, M.D., M.S.
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, TX Brittany Dingley, M.D., M.P.H., FRCSC
The Ottawa Hospital  Research Institute 
Ottawa, ON, Canada Jennifer R. Eads, M.D.
University of Pennsylvania Abramson Cancer Center 
Philadelphia, PA Bret Friday, M.D., Ph.D.
Essentia Health Cancer Center
Duluth, MN Kathryn E. Hitchcock, M.D., Ph.D., M.S.
University of Florida College of Medicine
Gainesville, FL Timothy J. Hobday, M.D.
Mayo Clinic
Rochester, MN Thomas A. Hope, M.D.
University of California, San Francisco 
San Francisco, CA Erik S. Mittra, M.D., Ph.D.
Oregon Health & Science University 
Portland, OR Amr R. M. Mohamed, M.D.
University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center
Cleveland, OH Sten Myrehaug, M.D., FRCPC
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre
Toronto, ON, Canada Itzhak Nir, M.D.
University of New Mexico Comprehensive Cancer Center
Albuquerque, NM Fang-Shu Ou, Ph.D.
Mayo Clinic
Rochester, MN Brian H. Ramnaraign, M.D.
University of Florida College of Medicine
Gainesville, FL Diane Reidy-Lagunes, M.D.
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
New York, NY David B. Schrimmer, M.D.
Patient Advocate 
Sacramento, CA Walid L. Shaib, M.D.
Northwest Georgia Oncology Centers
Cartersville, GA Bassam B. Sonbol, M.D.
Mayo Clinic
Phoenix, AZ Michael C. Soulen, M.D.
University of Pennsylvania Abramson Cancer Center
Philadelphia, PA Jonathan R. Strosberg, M.D.
H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute 
Tampa, FL Namrata Vijayvergia, M.D.
Fox Chase Cancer Center 
Philadelphia, PA Mary M. Zoeller, M.S.W.
Patient Advocate 
Indianapolis, IN Jane Hettinger, Ph.D.jane.hettinger@nih.gov  Pancreas Task Force Efrat Dotan, M.D.
Fox Chase Cancer Center 
Philadelphia, PA Andrew H. Ko, M.D.
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, CA  Andrew Aguirre, M.D., Ph.D.
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute 
Boston, MA Helene Andrews-Polymenis, D.V.M., Ph.D.
Patient Advocate 
Bryan, TX Nathan Bahary, M.D., Ph.D.
Allegheny Heath Network 
Pittsburgh, PA Gregory P. Botta, M.D., Ph.D.
University of California San Diego Moores Cancer Center
La Jolla, CA Dana Cardin, M.D., M.S.C.I.
Vanderbilt University Ingram Cancer Center 
Nashville, TN E. Gabriela Chiorean, M.D.
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center 
Seattle, WA Kathryn G. Craig
Patient Advocate
Arlington, TN Vijay Damarla, M.B.B.S., M.P.H.
Illinois CancerCare 
Decatur, IL Lauren Henke, M.D., M.S.C.I.
University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center
Cleveland, OH Joseph M. Herman, M.D., M.Sc., M.S.H.C.M., FACR
Northwell Health
New Hyde Park, NY Peter J. Hosein M.B.B.S.
University of Miami Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center 
Miami, FL Bryson W. Katona, M.D., Ph.D.
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine 
Philadelphia, PA Matthew H.G. Katz, M.D., FACS, FASCO
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, TX Kay Kays 
Patient Advocate 
Sun City, AZ Daniel A. King, M.D., Ph.D.
Northwell Health  
New Hyde Park, NY Andrew Lowy, M.D., FACS
University of California San Diego Moores Cancer Center 
San Diego, CA Gulam A. Manji, M.D., Ph.D.
Columbia University Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center 
New York, NY Omeed Moaven, M.D., FACS
Louisiana State University Health
New Orleans, LA Shubham Pant, M.B.B.S.
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Houston, TX Michael  J. Pishvaian, M.D., Ph.D.
Johns Hopkins University - Sibley Memorial Hospital 
Washington, DC Daniel Renouf, M.D., M.P.H., FRCPC
British Columbia Cancer Agency Vancouver Centre 
Vancouver, BC, Canada Nina N. Sanford, M.D.
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Dallas, TX Harshabad Singh, M.B.B.S.
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute  
Boston, MA Davendra P. Sohal, M.D., M.P.H.
University of Cincinnati Cancer Center 
Cleveland, OH Erica Tsang, M.D., M.P.H.
University of Toronto Princess Margaret Cancer Centre
Toronto, ON, Canada Raymond C. Wadlow, M.D.
Inova Schar Cancer Institute 
Fairfax, VA Hao Wang, Ph.D.
Johns Hopkins University Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center 
Baltimore, MD Lei Zheng, M.D., Ph.D.
Johns Hopkins University Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center 
Baltimore, MD George Zogopoulos, M.D., Ph.D., FRCS(C), FACS
McGill University 
Montréal, QC, Canada Jane Hettinger, Ph.D.jane.hettinger@nih.gov  Rectal-Anal Task Force Prajnan Das, M.D., M.S., M.P.H.
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Houston, TX Jason A. Zell, D.O.
University of California Irvine 
Orange, CA  Christopher J. Anker, M.D.
University of Vermont Medical Center 
Burlington, VT Al B. Benson, M.D., FACP, FASCO
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine 
Chicago, IL Carl J. Brown, M.D., M.Sc., FRCSC, FACS
Providence Health Care - St. Paul's Hospital
Vancouver, BC, Canada Kristen K. Ciombor, M.D., M.S.C.I., M.A.
Vanderbilt University Ingram Cancer Center 
Nashville, TN Stacey A. Cohen, M.D.
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center
Seattle, WA Dustin Deming, M.D.
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI Jennifer Dorth, M.D., M.H.Sc.
Case Western Reserve University 
Cleveland, OH Karuna Ganesh, M.D., Ph.D.
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
New York, NY Manju George, D.V.M., Ph.D.
Patient Advocate
Omaha, NE Marc J. Gollub, M.D., FACR
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
New York, NY Vallerie L. Gordon, M.D., FRCPC
University of Manitoba
Winnipeg, MB, Canada William A. Hall, M.D.
Medical College of Wisconsin 
Milwaukee, WI David Horowitz, M.D.
Columbia University Irving Medical Center 
New York, NY Atif Iqbal, M.D., FACS, FACRS
Baylor College of Medicine 
Houston, TX Mehraneh D. Jafari, M.D.
Weill Cornell Medical College
New York, NY Krishan R. Jethwa, M.D.
Mayo Clinic
Rochester, MN Adel Kardosh, M.D., Ph.D.
Oregon Health & Science University
Portland, OR Lillian R. Kreppel
Patient Advocate 
New York, NY Eric D. Miller  M.D., Ph.D.
The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center 
Columbus, OH Jonathan Nowak, M.D., Ph.D.
Brigham and Women's Hospital 
Boston, MA Lindsay B. Romak, M.D.
Christiana Care
Newark, DE Leonard Saltz, M.D.
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
New York, NY Niloy J. Samadder, M.D., M.Sc.
Mayo Clinic 
Phoenix, AZ Enrique Sanz Garcia, M.D., Ph.D.
University of Toronto Princess Margaret Cancer Centre 
Toronto, ON, Canada Deborah Schrag, M.D., M.P.H.
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
New York, NY Maseshwari Senthill, M.D.
University of California, Irvine 
Orange, CA Arshin Sheybani, M.D.
UnityPoint Health
Des Moines, IA Martin R. Weiser, M.D.
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
New York, NY Kathryn A. Winter, M.S.
NRG Oncology Statistics and Data Management Center
Philadelphia, PA Jane Hettinger, Ph.D.jane.hettinger@nih.gov 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Legislative Activities and History - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/legislative
txt: The NCI Office of Government and Congressional Relations (OGCR) maintains relationships across the federal government to ensure responsiveness to legislative and accountability activities affecting the Institute and its constituents. OGCR monitors and analyzes legislative actions, facilitates NCI’s communication with Congress and other government oversight agencies, and works closely with other offices at the Institute and agency level to keep the NCI community abreast of relevant congressional issues and interests. Information about recent NCI interactions with Congress, relevant legislation, and additional resources can be found below. Learn more about OGCR’s role.  Hearings and Testimonies 


Find written testimony from NCI experts from appropriations hearings and other hearings focused on a particular cancer related topic.  Current Congress 


Find legislation introduced in the 118th Congress that is relevant to the NCI.  Committees of Interest


Learn more about the specific committees which appropriate funds, authorize programs, or oversee activities of the National Cancer Institute.  Legislative Resources


Find external resources as well as a glossary of commons legislative terms.  Recent Public Laws Page


Read about legislation related to the mission of NCI that has been signed into law in recent years.  Contact OGCR


Contact the Office of Government and Congressional Relations (OGCR) if you have any questions or need more information on federal legislation and congressional activity affecting cancer research.  Find written testimony from NCI experts from appropriations hearings and other hearings focused on a particular cancer related topic. Find legislation introduced in the 118th Congress that is relevant to the NCI. Learn more about the specific committees which appropriate funds, authorize programs, or oversee activities of the National Cancer Institute. Find external resources as well as a glossary of commons legislative terms. Read about legislation related to the mission of NCI that has been signed into law in recent years. Contact the Office of Government and Congressional Relations (OGCR) if you have any questions or need more information on federal legislation and congressional activity affecting cancer research.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Recombinant Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Bivalent Vaccine - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/recombinant-hpv-bivalent-vaccine
txt: The HPV bivalent vaccine protects against infection with high-risk HPV types 16 and 18, which cause most precancers and cancers of the cervix.  The HPV bivalent vaccine is used in females aged 10 to 25 years to prevent: Cervical cancer. Lesions that sometimes lead to cervical cancer. The recombinant HPV bivalent vaccine is no longer available in the United States. It is still used in other countries. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Vaccine - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. More Evidence that One HPV Vaccine Dose Protects against Cancer-Causing Infections HPV and Cancer Despite Proven Safety of HPV Vaccines, More Parents Have Concerns Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Vaccines Single Dose of HPV Vaccine Yields Long-Term Protection from Many Cancer-Causing Types HPV Vaccine May Provide Men with “Herd Immunity” against Oral HPV Infections The HPV Vaccine: Increasing the Use of an Important Cancer Prevention Tool Find Clinical Trials for Recombinant Human Papillomavirus Bivalent Vaccine - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: About Rare Cancers - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/pediatric-adult-rare-tumor/rare-tumors/about-rare-cancers
txt: Rare cancers are those that affect fewer than 40,000 people per year in the U.S. As a group, they make up just over a quarter of all cancers. Because rates of cancer in children are very low, all children’s cancers are considered rare. A quarter of all cancer deaths each year are due to rare cancers. Although new treatments are always being developed, finding new treatments for rare cancers is very hard for many reasons. The MyPART network was started to make it easier to find treatments for rare cancers. Rare cancers are challenging for patients, doctors, and scientists. For patients: It often takes a long time from the time you think something is wrong to the time when doctors know that you have a rare cancer and what kind of cancer it is.  It is hard to find doctors who know a lot about your cancer and how to treat it.  It is hard to know what to do when doctors don’t agree on how to treat your cancer.  You may need to travel far from your home and family to get treatment for your rare cancer.  For doctors: You may not know what to tell your patient about what to expect with their rare cancer.  You may not have been trained in how to treat this type of rare cancer.  It is hard to find an expert in the rare cancer who can answer questions or to whom you can refer your patient.  For scientists: There may be no information about the rare cancer to give you ideas on which drugs could treat it.  There may be no animal or cell models of the rare cancer in which to test your ideas.  There may not be enough tumor samples from rare cancer patients available for your research.  If you have an idea of a drug that could treat the cancer, it may be hard to find enough patients with the rare cancer to test your idea. 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Rhabdoid Tumor Predisposition Syndrome Type 1 (PDQ®) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/publications/pdq/information-summaries/genetics/rtps1-hp-pdq
txt:  Introduction  Nomenclature  Genetics  Cancer Risks, Spectrum, and Characteristics  Management  Latest Updates to This Summary (03/05/2024)  About This PDQ Summary  Rhabdoid   tumor predisposition syndrome type 1 (RTPS1) is caused by germline, or hereditary, heterozygous loss-of-function pathogenic variants in the SMARCB1 gene on chromosome 22q11.[1-3] Individuals with RTPS1 are at an increased risk of developing both central nervous system (CNS) and non-CNS rhabdoid tumors, including atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RTs), malignant rhabdoid tumors (MRTs) of the kidney, and extrarenal rhabdoid tumors. These tumors tend to require multimodal treatment such as surgery, chemotherapy, and possibly radiation therapy. These tumors occur most frequently in early childhood, often before the age of 3 years. Sévenet N, Sheridan E, Amram D, et al.: Constitutional mutations of the hSNF5/INI1 gene predispose to a variety of cancers. Am J Hum Genet 65 (5): 1342-8, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Biegel JA, Zhou JY, Rorke LB, et al.: Germ-line and acquired mutations of INI1 in atypical teratoid and rhabdoid tumors. Cancer Res 59 (1): 74-9, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Versteege I, Sévenet N, Lange J, et al.: Truncating mutations of hSNF5/INI1 in aggressive paediatric cancer. Nature 394 (6689): 203-6, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Individuals who harbor a germline pathogenic variant in SMARCB1 are said to have rhabdoid tumor predisposition syndrome type 1 (RTPS1).[1] Individuals who harbor a germline pathogenic variant in SMARCA4 are said to have rhabdoid tumor predisposition syndrome type 2 (RTPS2).[2] Nomenclature in genetic disorders continues to evolve, and future terminology for these disorders may reflect the proposed dyadic naming approach, incorporating both gene and phenotype.[3] Samples, Phenotypes and Ontologies Team: Rhabdoid Tumor Predisposition Syndrome 1. Ontology Lookup Service  European Molecular Biology Laboratory-European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), 2023. Available online. Last accessed October 17, 2023. Samples, Phenotypes and Ontologies Team: Rhabdoid Tumor Predisposition Syndrome 2. Ontology Lookup Service  European Molecular Biology Laboratory-European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), 2023. Available online. Last accessed October 17, 2023. Biesecker LG, Adam MP, Alkuraya FS, et al.: A dyadic approach to the delineation of diagnostic entities in clinical genomics. Am J Hum Genet 108 (1): 8-15, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Molecular Genetics Inheritance Related Disorders The SMARCB1 gene encodes the SMARCB1 protein (also called INI1 or BAF47), a member of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex, which helps control gene transcription.[1,2] Rhabdoid tumors develop when both copies of the SMARCB1 gene are inactivated, or in some cases, when both copies of the SMARCA4 gene are inactivated. Individuals with germline SMARCA4 variants have a diagnosis of rhabdoid tumor predisposition syndrome type 2. Loss of SMARCB1/INI1 expression (detected by immunohistochemistry) is included in the diagnostic criteria for rhabdoid tumors.[3] In individuals with rhabdoid   tumor predisposition syndrome type 1 (RTPS1), tumor development follows the Knudsen two-hit hypothesis. The first hit is caused by the inactivation of one copy of SMARCB1, typically by a truncating variant, copy-number change, or structural variant. The second hit is typically due to chromosomal deletion or loss of heterozygosity.[4]  It is estimated that approximately 25% to 35% of rhabdoid tumor cases are associated with a germline variant in SMARCB1.[5-7]   Higher rates have been reported in certain subgroups, including patients diagnosed at younger than 6 months (55%) and patients with multifocal tumors (78%).[8,9] It is recommended that all patients diagnosed with rhabdoid tumors consider genetic evaluation.[10] Whole- and partial-gene deletions, nonsense, and frameshift variants are seen most commonly, frequently affecting exons 2 through 7 of the SMARCB1 gene.[5,6,11]  Point mutations, duplications, and splice-site variants occur more rarely.[5,11,12] A case of ring chromosome 22 has also been reported in an individual with RTPS1.[13] RTPS1 is inherited in an autosomal  dominant manner. Penetrance is reported as greater than 90% for most types of truncating variants in SMARCB1.[7] However, these estimates are based on a modest number of observations and ascertainment of affected individuals and families. Most cases appear to be de novo, and individuals with rhabdoid tumors are often the  first person in the family to be affected.[6,14,15] This may be due to the aggressive nature of rhabdoid tumors. However, incomplete penetrance and late-onset tumors, including schwannoma and meningioma, have been reported in a small subset of families who are unaffected by rhabdoid tumors and carry a germline SMARCB1 variant.[5,11] Gonadal mosaicism in a parent has been well documented in RTPS1. Therefore, negative genetic testing of parental blood cannot rule out the risk that more than one child may inherit the pathogenic variant and have a diagnosis of RTPS1.[5,6,11,16,17] Genetic counseling has been suggested to discuss topics like prenatal testing and potential reproductive recurrence risk relevant to gonadal mosaicism.[5,6] Germline alterations in the SMARCB1 gene are primarily associated with two additional hereditary conditions, schwannomatosis and Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS). Cases of schwannoma have been reported in RTPS1 kindreds. However, rhabdoid tumors have not been reported in individuals with CSS. Generally, SMARCB1 variants associated with CSS are missense variants that cluster in the first and last exons of the gene.[11] In patients with schwannomatosis, variants are often nontruncating and occur in the 3’ untranslated (UTR) region of SMARCB1.[18] However, nonsense SMARCB1 variants or deletions/duplications of the whole gene/multiple exons are more often associated with rhabdoid tumors.[11,18] While these patterns represent the common genotype-phenotype correlations, they are not final, and overlap can be seen. However, exon-spanning deletions appear to occur exclusively in patients with RTPS1.[11] While genotype-phenotype correlations exist across these three disorders, there is limited information regarding genotype-phenotype correlations specific to RTPS1. Roberts CW, Biegel JA: The role of SMARCB1/INI1 in development of rhabdoid tumor. Cancer Biol Ther 8 (5): 412-6, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Reisman D, Glaros S, Thompson EA: The SWI/SNF complex and cancer. Oncogene 28 (14): 1653-68, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Foulkes WD, Kamihara J, Evans DGR, et al.: Cancer Surveillance in Gorlin Syndrome and Rhabdoid Tumor Predisposition Syndrome. Clin Cancer Res 23 (12): e62-e67, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Biegel JA, Zhou JY, Rorke LB, et al.: Germ-line and acquired mutations of INI1 in atypical teratoid and rhabdoid tumors. Cancer Res 59 (1): 74-9, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Eaton KW, Tooke LS, Wainwright LM, et al.: Spectrum of SMARCB1/INI1 mutations in familial and sporadic rhabdoid tumors. Pediatr Blood Cancer 56 (1): 7-15, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Bourdeaut F, Lequin D, Brugières L, et al.: Frequent hSNF5/INI1 germline mutations in patients with rhabdoid tumor. Clin Cancer Res 17 (1): 31-8, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Frühwald MC, Nemes K, Boztug H, et al.: Current recommendations for clinical surveillance and genetic testing in rhabdoid tumor predisposition: a report from the SIOPE Host Genome Working Group. Fam Cancer 20 (4): 305-316, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Nemes K, Johann PD, Steinbügl M, et al.: Infants and Newborns with Atypical Teratoid Rhabdoid Tumors (ATRT) and Extracranial Malignant Rhabdoid Tumors (eMRT) in the EU-RHAB Registry: A Unique and Challenging Population. Cancers (Basel) 14 (9): , 2022. [PUBMED Abstract] Pinto EM, Hamideh D, Bahrami A, et al.: Malignant rhabdoid tumors originating within and outside the central nervous system are clinically and molecularly heterogeneous. Acta Neuropathol 136 (2): 315-326, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Druker H, Zelley K, McGee RB, et al.: Genetic Counselor Recommendations for Cancer Predisposition Evaluation and Surveillance in the Pediatric Oncology Patient. Clin Cancer Res 23 (13): e91-e97, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Holsten T, Bens S, Oyen F, et al.: Germline variants in SMARCB1 and other members of the BAF chromatin-remodeling complex across human disease entities: a meta-analysis. Eur J Hum Genet 26 (8): 1083-1093, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Kordes U, Mautner VF, Oyen F, et al.: Evidence for a low-penetrant extended phenotype of rhabdoid tumor predisposition syndrome type 1 from a kindred with gain of SMARCB1 exon 6. Pediatr Blood Cancer 68 (10): e29185, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Byers HM, Adam MP, LaCroix A, et al.: Description of a new oncogenic mechanism for atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors in patients with ring chromosome 22. Am J Med Genet A 173 (1): 245-249, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Biegel JA, Tan L, Zhang F, et al.: Alterations of the hSNF5/INI1 gene in central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors and renal and extrarenal rhabdoid tumors. Clin Cancer Res 8 (11): 3461-7, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Nemes K, Clément N, Kachanov D, et al.: The extraordinary challenge of treating patients with congenital rhabdoid tumors-a collaborative European effort. Pediatr Blood Cancer 65 (6): e26999, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Gigante L, Paganini I, Frontali M, et al.: Rhabdoid tumor predisposition syndrome caused by SMARCB1 constitutional deletion: prenatal detection of new case of recurrence in siblings due to gonadal mosaicism. Fam Cancer 15 (1): 123-6, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Bruggers CS, Bleyl SB, Pysher T, et al.: Clinicopathologic comparison of familial versus sporadic atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RT) of the central nervous system. Pediatr Blood Cancer 56 (7): 1026-31, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Smith MJ, Wallace AJ, Bowers NL, et al.: SMARCB1 mutations in schwannomatosis and genotype correlations with rhabdoid tumors. Cancer Genet 207 (9): 373-8, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] As a class, copy-number (deletion) and truncating variants in SMARCB1 are associated with increased risk of tumor predisposition, although there are no known SMARCB1 genotypes that can predict whether a tumor (or type of tumor) will develop.[1] A meta-analysis of 185 carriers of SMARCB1 variants found that the most common tumor type was atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RTs), followed by rhabdoid tumors of the kidney and soft tissue.[1] Multifocal tumors were common. Other tumors found included meningiomas, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, chondrosarcomas, epithelioid sarcomas, leiomyosarcomas, leiomyomas, and myoepitheliomas. Anatomical locations of the tumors varied, especially in the brain.[2] Tumors can also be synchronous or metachronous. In patients with rhabdoid tumor predisposition syndrome type 1 (RTPS1), tumor onset typically occurs in very early childhood (often in infancy), and tumors may even be detected pre- or perinatally. There are rare case reports of adults developing SMARCB1-associated tumors.  As next-generation sequencing of tumors has become more prevalent, alterations in the SMARCB1 gene may require investigation for an underlying germline predisposition.  However, the absence of a genetic alteration in the SMARBC1 gene does not rule out an underlying cancer predisposition syndrome.[3] Second primary tumors have developed up to 15 years after the first primary tumor diagnosis, suggesting that lifetime surveillance is needed for patients with this syndrome.[4,5] Holsten T, Bens S, Oyen F, et al.: Germline variants in SMARCB1 and other members of the BAF chromatin-remodeling complex across human disease entities: a meta-analysis. Eur J Hum Genet 26 (8): 1083-1093, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Nemes K, Johann PD, Steinbügl M, et al.: Infants and Newborns with Atypical Teratoid Rhabdoid Tumors (ATRT) and Extracranial Malignant Rhabdoid Tumors (eMRT) in the EU-RHAB Registry: A Unique and Challenging Population. Cancers (Basel) 14 (9): , 2022. [PUBMED Abstract] Frühwald MC, Nemes K, Boztug H, et al.: Current recommendations for clinical surveillance and genetic testing in rhabdoid tumor predisposition: a report from the SIOPE Host Genome Working Group. Fam Cancer 20 (4): 305-316, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Bruggers CS, Linscott L, Lee JC, et al.: Molecular characterization of metachronous atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors occurring in a young man 15 years apart. Pediatr Blood Cancer 70 (1): e29836, 2023. [PUBMED Abstract] Bhatt MD, Al-Karmi S, Druker H, et al.: Second rhabdoid tumor 8 years after treatment of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor in a child with germline SMARCB1 mutation. Pediatr Blood Cancer 66 (3): e27546, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Genetic Counseling Rhabdoid Tumor Predisposition and Fertility Preservation Outcomes and Treatment Modification Surveillance Surveillance in Survivorship Experts in the field of cancer genetics recommend a referral for genetic counseling or genetic evaluation  for children who have been diagnosed with atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RTs), malignant rhaboid tumors (MRTs), or any other SMARCB1-deficient tumors. These recommendations are based on the American Association for Cancer Research's (AACR) Childhood Cancer Predisposition Workshop and  the European Society for Paediatric Oncology's (SIOPE) Host Genome Working Group guidelines.[1,2]  In the event that a child with an AT/RT or MRT died before completing the evaluation, counseling may be provided to parents and siblings. Treatments for AT/RTs and MRTs may reduce fertility in boys and girls.[3,4] Therefore, the medical team may offer fertility preservation to these patients.  Parents of children with AT/RTs and MRTs who undergo fertility preservation should be advised that if a germline SMARCB1 truncating variant is found, 50% of children derived from preserved gonadal tissue will inherit a SMARCB1 pathogenic variant and have a risk of developing rhabdoid tumors.  Prenatal genetic counseling is advised for individuals with RTPS1. In patients with  AT/RTs or extracranial rhabdoid tumors, germline SMARCB1 variants are associated with poor outcomes. The risk of metastasis may also be associated with a germline variant.[5,6]  Despite intensive therapy, fewer than half of children with rhabdoid tumor predisposition syndrome type 1 (RTPS1) become long-term survivors.  There are no data suggesting that treatment of patients with AT/RTs or MRTs should be modified because of a germline  RTPS1 diagnosis. For information about the treatment of AT/RTs, see Childhood Central Nervous System Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor Treatment. For information about the treatment of MRTs, see the Rhabdoid Tumors of the Kidney section in Wilms Tumor and Other Childhood Kidney Tumors Treatment and the Rhabdoid Tumor NOS (Extrarenal) section in Childhood Soft Tissue Sarcoma Treatment. In 2017, a group of experts in childhood cancer genetics created the first recommendations for cancer surveillance for patients with RTPS1.[7]  Since children with germline SMARCB1 truncating variants have an increased risk of developing AT/RTs in early childhood, screening recommendations include brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) every 3 months until age 5 years, after which surveillance ceases.  Because of the risk of MRTs of the kidney, abdominal ultrasonography is recommended every 3 months from birth, with no upper age limit to stop surveillance.  Whole-body MRI may also be considered until age 5 years.  Screening is not recommended for children with a germline missense pathogenic variant in the SMARCB1 gene because the risk of tumor development is very low. In 2021, the SIOPE Host Genome Working Group published guidelines for clinical surveillance and genetic testing in patients with RTPS1.[2]  These guidelines recommend an age-based approach to surveillance. Central nervous system (CNS) and abdominal imaging  occur every 1 to 3 months  for patients younger than 6 months, every 2 to 3 months for patients aged 7 to 18 months, and every 3 months for patients aged  19 months to 5 years. Yearly whole-body MRI is recommended for patients aged 5 years and older. For children with tumors and SMARCB1 truncating variants, surveillance should be ongoing to detect primary disease recurrence.  Survivors of AT/RTs will continue to require abdominal ultrasonography to screen for MRTs.  Conversely, children with MRTs of the kidney will continue  to undergo CNS surveillance for AT/RTs until age 5 years if they have a germline truncating variant in SMARCB1.[2] Level of evidence: 5 Druker H, Zelley K, McGee RB, et al.: Genetic Counselor Recommendations for Cancer Predisposition Evaluation and Surveillance in the Pediatric Oncology Patient. Clin Cancer Res 23 (13): e91-e97, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Frühwald MC, Nemes K, Boztug H, et al.: Current recommendations for clinical surveillance and genetic testing in rhabdoid tumor predisposition: a report from the SIOPE Host Genome Working Group. Fam Cancer 20 (4): 305-316, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Mulder RL, Font-Gonzalez A, Green DM, et al.: Fertility preservation for male patients with childhood, adolescent, and young adult cancer: recommendations from the PanCareLIFE Consortium and the International Late Effects of Childhood Cancer Guideline Harmonization Group. Lancet Oncol 22 (2): e57-e67, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Mulder RL, Font-Gonzalez A, Hudson MM, et al.: Fertility preservation for female patients with childhood, adolescent, and young adult cancer: recommendations from the PanCareLIFE Consortium and the International Late Effects of Childhood Cancer Guideline Harmonization Group. Lancet Oncol 22 (2): e45-e56, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Reddy AT, Strother DR, Judkins AR, et al.: Efficacy of High-Dose Chemotherapy and Three-Dimensional Conformal Radiation for Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor: A Report From the Children's Oncology Group Trial ACNS0333. J Clin Oncol 38 (11): 1175-1185, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] Nemes K, Bens S, Kachanov D, et al.: Clinical and genetic risk factors define two risk groups of extracranial malignant rhabdoid tumours (eMRT/RTK). Eur J Cancer 142: 112-122, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Foulkes WD, Kamihara J, Evans DGR, et al.: Cancer Surveillance in Gorlin Syndrome and Rhabdoid Tumor Predisposition Syndrome. Clin Cancer Res 23 (12): e62-e67, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] The PDQ cancer information summaries are reviewed regularly and updated as new information becomes available.  This section describes the latest changes made to this summary as of the date above. This is a new summary. This summary is written and maintained by the PDQ Cancer Genetics Editorial Board and the PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board, which is
editorially independent of NCI.  The summary reflects an independent review of
the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or NIH.  More
information about summary policies and the role of the PDQ Editorial Boards  in
maintaining the PDQ summaries can be found on the About This PDQ Summary and PDQ® Cancer Information for Health Professionals pages. This PDQ cancer information summary for health professionals provides comprehensive, peer-reviewed, evidence-based information about the genetics, cancer risks, and management of  rhabdoid tumor predisposition syndrome type 1. It is intended as a resource to inform and assist clinicians in the care of their patients.  It does not provide formal guidelines or recommendations for making health care decisions. This summary is reviewed regularly and updated as necessary by the PDQ Cancer Genetics Editorial Board and the PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board, which are editorially independent of the National Cancer Institute (NCI).  The summary reflects an independent review of the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Board members review recently published articles each month to determine whether an article should: be discussed at a meeting, be cited with text, or replace or update an existing article that is already cited. Changes to the summaries are made through a consensus process in which Board members evaluate the strength of the evidence in  the published articles and determine how the article should be included in the summary. The lead reviewers for Rhabdoid Tumor Predisposition Syndrome Type 1 are: Julia Meade, MD (UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh) Sarah Scollon, MS, CGC (Baylor College of Medicine & Texas Children's Hospital) Douglas Stewart, MD (National Cancer Institute) Any comments or questions about the summary content should be submitted to Cancer.gov through the NCI website's Email Us. Do not contact the individual Board Members with questions or comments about the summaries. Board members will not respond to individual inquiries. Some of the reference citations in this summary are accompanied by a level-of-evidence designation. These designations are intended to help readers assess the strength of the evidence supporting the use of specific interventions or approaches. The PDQ Cancer Genetics Editorial Board and the PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board use a formal evidence ranking system in developing its level-of-evidence designations. PDQ is a registered trademark. Although the content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text, it cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless it is presented in its entirety and is regularly updated. However, an author would be permitted to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks succinctly: [include excerpt from the summary].” The preferred citation for this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Cancer Genetics Editorial Board and PDQ® Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Rhabdoid Tumor Predisposition Syndrome Type 1. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/publications/pdq/information-summaries/genetics/rtps1-hp-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use within the PDQ summaries only. Permission to use images outside the context of PDQ information must be obtained from the owner(s) and cannot be granted by  the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the illustrations in this summary, along with many other cancer-related images, is available in Visuals Online, a collection of over 2,000 scientific images. Based on the strength of the available evidence, treatment options may be described as either “standard” or “under clinical evaluation.” These classifications should not be used as a basis for insurance reimbursement determinations. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s Email Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: What Is SEER? - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/public-health/what-is-seer-infographic
txt: NCI's Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program provides information on cancer statistics that underpins efforts to reduce the cancer burden among the U.S. population. Learn more about the SEER program.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Isatuximab-irfc - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/isatuximab-irfc
txt: This page contains brief information about isatuximab-irfc
         and a collection of links to more information about the use of 
         this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Isatuximab-irfc
         is approved to treat:  Multiple myeloma.  It is used:With pomalidomide and dexamethasone in adults who have received at least two therapies, including lenalidomide and a proteasome inhibitor, orWith carfilzomib and dexamethasone in
adults whose disease has relapsed (come back) or is refractory (does not respond to treatment) after one to three other therapies. With pomalidomide and dexamethasone in adults who have received at least two therapies, including lenalidomide and a proteasome inhibitor, or With carfilzomib and dexamethasone in
adults whose disease has relapsed (come back) or is refractory (does not respond to treatment) after one to three other therapies. Isatuximab-irfc
         is also being studied in the treatment of other types of
         cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Isatuximab-irfc - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Monoclonal Antibodies Find Clinical Trials for Isatuximab-irfc - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Oncology Models Forum - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/research-programs/omf
txt: Oncology Models Forum The Oncology Models Forum (OMF) was launched by the NCI in 2014 to fund research into advancing standard practices for modeling human cancers in mice and to facilitate collaborations, data sharing, and harmonization of mouse models. In 2016, the Funding Opportunity Announcement (FOA) was expanded to all mammalian model systems (PAR-16-059) and has been re-issued in 2017 (PAR-17-245), 2020 (PAR-20-131), and 2023 (PAR-23-281). Unlike many hypothesis-driven and mechanistic R01 projects, this program is devoted to ensuring mammalian models used for translational research questions are appropriate for those purposes and the models provide reliable and informative data for patient benefit. The OMF now includes a range of models including canine, porcine, organoid, and cell line models, in addition to many diverse mouse model systems.  OMF News and Highlights  OMF Funding Opportunity  OMF Meetings  NCI and OMF Resources Related to Oncology Models  Contacts for the OMF  Funded Projects  OMF News and Highlights OMF Funding Opportunity OMF Meetings NCI and OMF Resources Related to Oncology Models Contacts for the OMF Funded Projects OMF News and Highlights OMF Scientist Highlight: Scott Lowe Dr. Lowe, Chair of Cancer Biology & Genetics Program at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, is developing and characterizing electroporation-based genetically engineered mouse models (EPO-GEMMs) that enable studies of cancer biology and treatment. His team generated new mouse models (specifically EPO-GEMMs) of metastatic gastric cancer, which reveal mechanisms of disease progression. OMF Funding Opportunity PAR-23-281 : Research Projects to Enhance Applicability of Mammalian Models for Translational Research (R01 Clinical Trial Not Allowed) OMF Meetings May 16, 2024 
Oncology Models Forum Spring Seminar (Virtual) December 5-6, 2023Oncology Models Forum Annual Meeting July 23, 2023 Oncology Models Forum Summer Seminar March 15-16, 2022 Oncology Models Forum Annual Meeting December 9, 2021Oncology Models Forum Fall Seminar July 27, 2021Oncology Models Forum Summer Seminar March 30-31, 2021Oncology Models Forum Annual Meeting (Virtual) January 30, 2020
NCI Oncology Models Forum Meeting (NCI Shady Grove) November 8, 2018
NCI Oncology Models Forum Meeting (University of California, San Francisco) September 18-19, 2017Immune Interventions in Oncology: A Think Tank on Modeling Opportunities using Mice and Human Specimens (NCI Shady Grove) NCI and OMF Resources Related to Oncology Models Human Cancer Models Initiative (HCMI) Catalog – Resource of patient-derived next-generation cancer models developed by HCMI, which is an international collaboration between NCI, Cancer Research UK, the Wellcome Sanger Institute, and Hubrecht Organoid Technology  NCI Mouse Repository – NCI-funded resource for mouse cancer models and associated strains  Oncology Model Fidelity Score – Uses the Hallmarks of Cancer to compare cancer animal models to human cancer  Single R – Analyzes cellular heterogeneity from single-cell RNA sequencing data  Xcell – Analyzes cellular heterogeneity from bulk gene expression data  Contacts for the OMF For additional information about the OMF, please contact Dr. Joanna Watson or Dr. Christine Nadeau. Funded Projects Advancing Treatment Outcomes in Malignant Glioma by Integrating Immunotherapy and Standard of Care Using Genetically Engineered Mice that Recapitulate Molecular Feature of Human Glioma Modeling Myelodysplasia Mouse Models of Kras-Mutant Colorectal Cancer Visualizing Tumor Heterogeneity in an Immune Intact and Autochthonous Mouse Model of Breast Cancer Development of Novel Spontaneous HPV Cervicovaginal Carcinoma Models for Cancer Immunotherapy Improving Hepatocellular Carcinoma Mouse Modeling by Understanding the Malignant Potential and Biology of Liver Cell Subpopulations
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Coping with Stomach Cancer and Treatment - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/stomach/coping
txt: It's important to talk with your health care provider about side effects you are experiencing and any concerns you have. Stomach cancer and its treatments may cause physical and emotional side effects. When you first learn that you have stomach cancer, you may wonder how you’re going to cope with the upcoming changes in your life. One step you can take is to be informed of the changes that may occur and what resources are available to help you. Speaking up about any problems you have can give you a greater sense of control. Your health care team can talk with you about ways to reduce these side effects so you feel better. For resources on the common physical side effects of treatment for stomach cancer, see Stomach Cancer Treatment. Learn more about side effects of cancer treatment and ways to manage them. For help with emotional side effects, see Emotions and Cancer. Stomach cancer and its treatments may affect your ability to eat enough food or absorb the nutrients from food. If part or all of your stomach has been removed, you might need to eat smaller amounts of food more often or make changes to what you eat. Your doctor or dietitian may recommend that you stay upright for some time after eating. They can also help you adjust your diet to make sure you get the nutrition you need. To get tips on eating during cancer treatment, see Eating Hints: Before, during, and after Cancer Treatment. Learn more about how cancer affects nutrition in Nutrition in Cancer Care. Stomach cancer and its treatment can change how you look and feel about yourself. Know that you aren't alone in how you feel.  Coping with changes to your body and the way you see yourself can be hard. But, over time, many people learn to adjust and move forward. Learn more about how body changes may affect your self-image and sex life after treatment and ways to cope and communicate your feelings in How Cancer Affects Your Self-Image and Sexuality. Adjusting to physical and emotional changes after cancer treatment and tips on coping with fear of recurrence. Many people who have been treated for stomach cancer need to visit their doctor regularly to get follow-up exams or tests. Planning and scheduling these appointments can be stressful and time-consuming. Waiting for test results can cause anxiety and an ongoing fear of recurrence. The added costs of things such as copays, medicines, and parking and transportation fees only add to the stress. For tips on how to deal with the fear of cancer coming back, see the section Coping with Fear of Recurrence on our A New Normal page. Learn ways to manage health care information, bills, and other records, along with tips for saving money on pain medicines. Cancer is one of the most costly diseases to treat in the United States. Even if you have health insurance, you may face major financial challenges and need help dealing with the costs of stomach cancer treatment. The problems a person has related to the cost of treatment is known as financial toxicity. For tips and ways to cope, see Managing Cancer Costs and Medical Information. To learn about financial toxicity and find out if you are at risk, see Financial Toxicity (Financial Distress) and Cancer Treatment.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Office of Management - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/om
txt: The Office of Management is responsible for administrative and financial functions of NCI. It includes the following offices.  Deputy Director for Management  Administrative Resource Centers  Ethics Office  Office of Workforce Strategy and Effectiveness  Information Technology Resource Center  Office of Acquisitions  Office of Budget and Finance  Office of Extramural Finance and Information Analysis  Office of Grants Administration  Office of Government and Congressional Relations  Office of Management Policy and Compliance  Office of Space and Facilities Management  Technology Transfer Center  Deputy Director for Management Administrative Resource Centers Ethics Office Office of Workforce Strategy and Effectiveness Information Technology Resource Center Office of Acquisitions Office of Budget and Finance Office of Extramural Finance and Information Analysis Office of Grants Administration Office of Government and Congressional Relations Office of Management Policy and Compliance Office of Space and Facilities Management Technology Transfer Center Deputy Director for Management The Office of the Deputy Director for Management provides executive leadership and oversight for all of NCI’s business functions and administrative activities. The office provides advice and guidance to the NCI director and other senior staff on business and administrative issues and leads a variety of management programs vital to the institute’s operations. The office also implements legislative and administrative mandates and develops innovative solutions for a variety of business processes and systems that impact NCI’s mission. Contact the Office of the Deputy Director for Management at NCIOfficeoftheDDM@mail.nih.gov. Administrative Resource Centers NCI’s Administrative Resource Centers guide and implement administrative services for NCI staff, including for budgets, procurement, personnel management, property accountability, facilities, travel, and other business management policies. The centers contribute to reports on NCI activities and recommend improvements for administrative functions. Ethics Office NCI’s Ethics Office administers a comprehensive ethics program to ensure that NCI employees comply with the institute’s statutory responsibilities and serve the public with integrity. The Ethics Office administers annual public and confidential financial disclosure processes, as well as reviews requests and provides advice for official duties, outside activities, sponsored travel, protocol clearance, collaborative agreement clearance, gifts, honorary awards, preclearance of new and special government employees, and post-employment activities to ensure compliance with laws, regulations and policies. The office advises and assists employees regarding the application of ethics laws, regulations, and policies. It develops NCI ethics training plans, advises the Office of the Director regarding conflicts of interest of employees, trainees, and other appointees, and identifies management issues requiring action by the Office of General Counsel, Office of Management Assessment and the Office of Inspector General. Contact the NCI Ethics Office at NCIEthics@mail.nih.gov. Office of Workforce Strategy and Effectiveness The Office of Workforce Strategy and Effectiveness advises NCI leadership on organizational performance and efficiency and provides coordinated policies, programs, services, tools, and resources to optimize organizational health, individual performance, and employee engagement. This is accomplished through five branches. The Workforce Development Branch focuses on organizational performance, talent development, NCI leadership programs, and strategic planning to maintain high performing teams. The Workforce Engagement Branch focuses on programs and systems that support employee engagement and wellness and creates an inclusive environment where all staff can thrive and contribute to the organization's mission. The Workforce Management Branch serves as the human resource (HR) liaison to the NCI’s Administrative Resource Centers, providing HR guidance and tools. This branch also facilitates senior level Title 42 recruitments, and coordinates NCI-wide performance management and awards program. The Workforce Planning Branch conducts human capital data analyses and provides human capital planning services and resources to NCI leaders. This branch also orients and onboards new employees and supervisors and provides change management services. The Workforce Relations Branch provides advice regarding employee productivity, performance and conduct and actions to enforce compliance with Federal laws, regulations, and policies, and coordinates resolution of informal and formal complaint processes. Contact the Office of Workforce Strategy and Effectiveness at nciowd-r@mail.nih.gov. Information Technology Resource Center The Information Technology Resource Center oversees the Office of Management’s information technology (IT) program. Among other duties, it manages the office’s administrative and management applications and reporting technology tools and oversees the strategic planning, development, integration, and financial support of technology. The IT Resource Center partners with NCI’s Center for Biomedical Informatics and Information Technology (CBIIT) to ensure that the Office of Management's IT applications and systems comply and operate within all infrastructure and security requirements supported by CBIIT. Contact the IT Resource Center at NCIOMITRC@mail.nih.gov. Office of Acquisitions The Office of Acquisitions negotiates, awards, and administers contracts and simplified acquisitions in support of NCI’s mission to prevent, diagnose, and treat cancer. It publicizes contracting opportunities and conducts acquisitions for research and development services, other development services, and supplies. Contact the Office of Acquisitions at 240-276-5440 or NCI_Contracts@mail.nih.gov. Office of Budget and Finance The Office of Budget and Finance plans, directs, and coordinates the financial management of NCI and advises NCI leaders on all aspects of the agency’s budget. This includes managing and monitoring the NCI budget, administering accounting and funds control systems, managing the preparation of the President’s Budget Request for NCI, explaining the NCI budget and providing information to National Institutes of Health and Department of Health and Human Services officials and the public, and analyzing past, present, and prospective financial trends. The Office of Budget and Finance also produces the NCI Budget Fact Book, an annual report that provides information and data from the previous fiscal year. Contact the Office of Budget and Finance at 240-760-6150 or nciobfInquiries@mail.nih.gov. Office of Extramural Finance and Information Analysis The Office of Extramural Finance and Information Analysis manages all financial aspects of NCI’s extramural grant programs, including advising on budgets and policies to inform how extramural research is funded. The office manages NCI’s grants-related financial information systems and is the primary contact for financial management of extramural research. Contact the Office of Extramural Finance and Information Analysis at ncioefia@mail.nih.gov. Office of Grants Administration NCI’s Office of Grants Administration supports grants and cooperative agreements, helping to build a cohesive and comprehensive cancer research agenda. The office manages the business aspect of over $3 billion in annual grant awards and ensures that grantees and NCI comply with all legal requirements and administrative policies. Learn about grant policies and how to apply for a grant. Contact the Office of Grants Administration at 240-276-6399 or kochers@mail.nih.gov. Office of Government and Congressional Relations The Office of Government and Congressional Relations facilitates relationships between NCI, the US Congress, and the public by keeping NCI leaders informed about legislative activities relevant to NCI, the National Institutes of Health, and the National Cancer Program. The office processes and responds to Freedom of Information Act and Privacy Act requests and maintains the State Cancer Legislative Database program. It works with Congress, the White House, the Department of Health and Human Services and its Office of Inspector General, and the US Government Accountability Office. Contact the Office of Government and Congressional Relations at NCIOGCR@mail.nih.go. Office of Management Policy and Compliance The Office of Management Policy and Compliance provides management oversight of and advises NCI leadership on the execution and oversight of Federal, Department of Health and Human Services, and National Institutes of Health administrative management requirements. It develops NCI-wide management and administrative policies, procedures, and evaluations and analyzes business data to recommend steps to ensure compliance with Federal requirements. The office serves as the NCI liaison with NIH and other Federal agencies in the coordination and reporting of administrative management activities. Contact the Office of Management Policy and Compliance at 240-276-5582 or by email at: Risk Management: NCIRiskManagement@mail.nih.gov  Records Management Program: NCIRecordsMgmtOfficer@mail.nih.gov  Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA) OMB Clearance Program: NCI_OMB_Clearance@mail.nih.gov  Office of Space and Facilities Management NCI’s Office of Space and Facilities Management acquires and manages property assets, from leasing and renovation plans to security and daily operations of NCI facilities. The office manages NCI’s Space Management Database, Construction Grants Program, and Facility Management Repair and Improvement funds. It represents NCI on NIH’s Critical Response Team and NIH’s Master Plan. Contact the Office of Space and Facilities Management at NCIOSFMMailbox@nih.gov. Technology Transfer Center NCI’s Technology Transfer Center enables and guides collaboration, invention development, and licensing of biomedical technology by facilitating collaborations and partnerships between NIH researchers and nongovernment scientists and organizations involved in biomedical research and development. The center negotiates co-development agreements with outside parties, including universities, pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, and non-profit organizations. Contact the Technology Transfer Center by phone at 240-276-5530 (Rockville) or 301-624-8775 (Frederick) or at ncitechtransfer@mail.nih.gov.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: AI in Cancer Research: Research Highlights - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/resources/ai-cancer-research/research-highlights
txt: Artificial intelligence (AI)-driven technology is used for a variety of cancer research purposes. NCI is funding research to advance the use of AI to increase our knowledge of cancer and to improve clinical decision making and cancer care, from active grants to published articles, aimed at advancing existing and emerging research areas in AI. Active NCI grants incorporating artificial intelligence methods into their research: Use this live NIH RePORTER query using keywords relevant to AI to search for active NCI grants. Cancer Data Science Pulse: Gain insights on cancer data science with regular blog posts on cancer and AI from NCI's Center for Biomedical Informatics and Information Technology. Cancer Currents: Read recently published news and commentaries from the Cancer Currents blog on how artificial intelligence is used to conduct cancer research, deliver cancer treatment, improve patient care, and screen for cancer: Is AI Ready to Play a Leading Role in Colorectal Cancer Screening?October 10, 2023, by Sharon Reynolds
Using computer-aided detection (CAD) during a colonoscopy doesn’t help doctors find the growths most likely to become colorectal cancer, two studies find. Researchers agreed that CAD, which is aided by artificial intelligence technology, needs further refinement. Can Artificial Intelligence–Driven Chatbots Correctly Answer Questions about Cancer?October 3, 2023, by Edward Winstead
Can AI chatbots give people accurate information about cancer and its treatment? The answer appears to be: Not yet. Results from two studies have found that, although AI chatbots can gather cancer information from reputable sources, their responses to questions about treatment and other topics can include errors and omissions.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Keren Witkin, Ph.D. - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/about/contact/keren-witkin
txt: Dr. Keren Witkin manages a grant portfolio focused on DNA repair, genomic instability, telomeres and telomerase biology, and gene fusions in pediatric cancers. Along with her DCB responsibilities, Dr. Witkin is also a member of the NCI Workplace Civility Committee, as well as a co-chair of a Cancer Moonshot Implementation Team. Dr. Witkin is very excited about research that is taking advantage of new medicinal chemistry approaches  for the development of drugs to treat fusion oncoprotein-driven pediatric cancers She says, “There currently aren’t many targeted therapeutic strategies for pediatric cancers, and I hope DCB’s efforts and support can help us address that."  Research Programs Dr. Witkin also manages an NCI cooperative agreement program, as well as is involved in NIH Common Fund and Cancer Moonshot programs: Targeting Fusion Oncoproteins in Childhood Cancers (TFCC)  Fusion Oncoproteins in Childhood Cancer (FusOnC2)  Metabolomics   Background Prior to her work in DCB as a program director, Dr. Witkin was a AAAS Science and Policy Fellow in the Office of Research of Women’s Health (ORWH) at NIH. After her fellowship, she worked as a program director for the NIH Common Fund’s Metabolomics Program. She came to DCB because of the division’s support for research focusing on DNA and RNA biochemistry in cancer and the opportunity to support science in needed areas. Education Ph.D., Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley  B.S., Biological Sciences, Wellesley College 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Exemestane Reduces Breast Cancer Risk in High-Risk Postmenopausal Women - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/breast/research/exemestane-reduces-risk
txt: Adapted from the NCI Cancer Bulletin. The list of drugs that have been shown to reduce a woman's chance of developing breast cancer can now be expanded from two to three. Clinical trial results presented at the 2011 American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) annual meeting showed that the aromatase inhibitor exemestane (Aromasin®)—commonly used to treat early and advanced-stage breast cancer—substantially reduced the risk of invasive breast cancer in postmenopausal women at high risk of developing the disease. The findings were also published online June 4, 2011, in the New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM). At 3 years of follow-up, women who took exemestane were 65 percent less likely than women who took a placebo to develop breast cancer. This is the largest reduction in risk seen in any of the four large breast cancer prevention trials that have been conducted to date. In previous trials, daily use of tamoxifen or raloxifene reduced breast cancer risk by approximately 50 percent and 38 percent, respectively, after 5 years of follow-up; both drugs were eventually approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to reduce breast cancer risk. Some researchers cautioned that 3 years of follow-up may not be long enough to determine the extent of any serious side effects, including osteoporosis, from long-term use of aromatase inhibitors in this patient population. Despite the limited follow-up, the trial's principal investigator, Paul Goss, M.B. BCh, Ph.D., of Harvard Medical School, said the findings were enough to establish exemestane "as a new option for breast cancer prevention in postmenopausal women." All women older than 60, who by virtue of their age alone have an increased breast cancer risk, "should be made aware of these results," he continued. Sponsored by the National Cancer Institute of Canada, the trial, dubbed MAP.3, enrolled 4,560 women at increased risk of developing breast cancer. Women were determined to be at increased risk if they had at least one of several risk factors: age 60 years or older; a history of abnormal breast cell growth or having had a noninvasive lesion known as ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS); or an elevated 5-year score on the Gail model, a commonly used breast cancer risk model. Participants were randomly assigned to take exemestane or a placebo daily for 5 years. Overall, 11 women assigned to exemestane developed an invasive breast cancer, compared with 32 women who took the placebo. Exemestane use also led to statistically significant reductions in the development of DCIS, Dr. Goss said, and the invasive tumors that did develop in women taking exemestane were less aggressive than those in the placebo group. Understanding the Side Effects Importantly, Dr. Goss stressed, women taking exemestane had no increased risk of serious side effects. "We looked for serious toxicities, but we did not find them," he said. The incidence of osteoporosis, cardiac events, and bone fractures were identical for women taking exemestane and for those taking the placebo. However, women who took exemestane had a small, though not statistically significant, increase in menopausal symptoms, such as hot flashes and joint pain. Overall, approximately 30 percent of participants stopped taking exemestane because of side effects, about 10 percent each year. This is similar to what is seen in clinical practice in women taking an aromatase inhibitor as an adjuvant treatment for early-stage breast cancer. The data from the MAP.3 trial indicate that exemestane provides another option for risk reduction in the appropriate women, said Worta McCaskill-Stevens, M.D., of NCI's Division of Cancer Prevention (DCP). "But when thinking about prevention, women ask [about] the duration of use of the drug and [want] a clear understanding of its potential side effects," she cautioned. Of particular concern is severe joint pain, or arthralgia, whose incidence has been relatively high in women being treated for cancer with aromatase inhibitors. Several studies, however, have shown that women continue to experience the benefits of treatment after stopping aromatase inhibitors—a phenomenon known as a carry-over effect—and that they have fewer adverse events. The women who participated in MAP.3 will have to be followed to better assess the extent and significance of long-term side effects, especially osteoporosis, she stressed. Overall, because of the short follow-up in the trial, it's too early to definitively understand the drug's risks, Dr. McCaskill-Stevens added. "We can't say that the adverse events in this group of women will be the same as those seen in women receiving an aromatase inhibitor for treatment," she continued. "That's a different patient population as it relates to assessing benefit and risk." Victor Vogel, M.D., director of the cancer institute at Geisinger Health System in Danville, PA, who was involved in the tamoxifen and raloxifene prevention trials, called the risk reduction findings with exemestane "very impressive." Many of exemestane's side effects can be prevented and treated with monitoring, he explained. Even if a woman stops taking exemestane for risk reduction because of side effects, Dr. Goss believes, the effort will have been worthwhile. "We feel comfortable that if a woman takes [exemestane] for 6 months or a year, she's gained benefit," he said. Several clinical trials currently under way should provide more information about the safety and possible side effects of aromatase inhibitors when used for breast cancer risk reduction, explained Leslie Ford, M.D., of DCP. The British IBIS-2 trial is comparing the aromatase inhibitor anastrazole with a placebo in women at high risk of breast cancer. And a U.S. trial being led by the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project is comparing the aromatase inhibitor letrozole with tamoxifen in postmenopausal women with DCIS. More Choices in the Clinic The failure of tamoxifen and raloxifene to break through into the clinic has been well documented, with women and their doctors citing toxicity as one of their chief concerns. "The good news is that exemestane has a completely different toxicity profile," said Susan Domchek, M.D., director of the Cancer Risk Evaluation Program at the University of Pennsylvania Abramson Cancer Center, who was a site investigator on the trial. "For some women, exemestane will be viewed as a nice choice because of that difference." As Dr. Vogel stressed, it's not medical oncologists but primary care physicians who would talk with women about their breast cancer risk and whether they should consider taking a drug for prevention. This group of clinicians, along with women themselves, needs to be educated about breast cancer prevention, he explained. "We need to train primary care physicians about how to do risk assessment; how to counsel these patients," said Dr. Vogel. "And we need to ensure that reimbursement is available so that doctors get paid for taking the time to counsel their patients about preventive interventions." Several research groups are developing tools to help clinicians with some of the risk assessment and counseling issues, Dr. Domchek noted. In an accompanying editorial in NEJM, Nancy Davidson, M.D., and Thomas Kensler, Ph.D., of the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute noted the need to better identify "high-risk cohorts and biomarkers that can predict response to a particular intervention." Indeed, as Andrew Seidman, M.D., of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center noted, unlike with blood pressure or cholesterol medicines, one cannot measure whether tamoxifen, raloxifene, or exemestane is having its intended preventive effect. "There's no feedback loop," he said, to let doctors and women know whether the drug is having the intended effect. The patent for exemestane expired in 2010, and Pfizer, which manufactures the drug, has not said whether it will apply to the FDA to market exemestane for breast cancer risk reduction. Editor's Note: A study examining bone health in a subgroup of 351 MAP.3 trial participants revealed that, even with calcium and vitamin D supplementation, women who received daily exemestane had a greater decrease in bone mineral density (BMD) after 2 years of treatment than women who received placebo. The results were published online February 6, 2012, in Lancet Oncology. Longer follow-up will be necessary to determine whether the differences in BMD changes observed in the MAP.3 substudy will be reflected in differences in fracture risk. An increased risk of fracture due to exemestane would be of particular concern in the breast cancer prevention setting.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Jace and Lisa - Childhood Cancer Advocates - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/childhood/childhood-cancer-data-initiative/stories/jace
txt: Lisa is working to fulfill her son, Jace’s, vision of improving diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) research. Co-Founders, Tough2gether Against DIPG/DMG Jace (he/him) wanted to be a lawyer. His mother, Lisa (she/her), recalls his strategic mind, leadership, and compassion. When diagnosed with diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG), these qualities drove him to tell the stories of people with DIPG and push for research innovation. Jace knew harnessing data could lead to progress and when consenting to donating his brain, he noted: “Dear scientists, I’m giving you my greatest asset. Please use it and share what you learn from it. If you don’t, I’ll haunt you.” In 2021, at age 22, Jace passed away, and Lisa got to work fulfilling what they started together. So far, that’s led to piloting a DIPG data project, creating a board of DIPG experts to advise providers and families, and more. “If he could fight for 25 months, what would happen if we committed 25 months to see how far our organization could go?”, Lisa said. “We’re at month 14 and we’ve had a great start. We shared Jace’s vision at the White House Cancer Moonshot Childhood Cancer Forum this year and believe good things are coming for childhood cancer.” Jace was also featured in a 2019 NCI Cancer Currents Blog post.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Sharon Savage – Childhood Cancer Researcher - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/childhood/childhood-cancer-data-initiative/stories/sharon
txt: Dr. Sharon Savage wants to understand what causes cancer and believes that data sharing could help. Clinical Director, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics  Branch Chief and Senior Investigator, Clinical Genetics Branch at NCI  As a pediatric oncologist, Dr. Sharon Savage (she/her) is all too familiar with the impact of a cancer diagnosis on children and families. Like them, she wants to understand why children develop cancer. That desire has driven her to study cancer etiology (the causes of cancer) and specifically the role of telomeres (end caps on chromosomes that keep our DNA from unraveling) and the risk for developing different types of cancer. Telomere biology is just one example of how improved data sharing could really make a difference. “Cancer etiology is complex and large sample sizes are required to ensure we have the statistical power to draw appropriate conclusions,” Sharon said. Sharing data can help but, she notes, the data should be collected in the same manner across study populations. The Childhood Cancer Data Initiative aims to facilitate data standardization in order to accelerate critical research like Sharon’s.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: MyPART News - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/pediatric-adult-rare-tumor/news
txt: MyPART hosts events and participates in scientific conferences that help promote rare tumor research. Check back often to read news about MyPART activities and upcoming events.  Rare Tumor Clinics


Each year, the MyPART team hosts clinics on select rare tumors at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, MD. During these one- to three-day meetings, people with the rare tumor and experts from around the country meet to learn more about the tumor from each other.  Upcoming Events


MyPART team members are participating in meetings to talk about our programs.  Rare Tumor News


Recent news about the MyPART program and other updates in the study of rare tumors.  The MyPART Minute – Newsletter Archive


The MyPART Minute is the monthly newsletter from MyPART. Find archived issues here.  Each year, the MyPART team hosts clinics on select rare tumors at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, MD. During these one- to three-day meetings, people with the rare tumor and experts from around the country meet to learn more about the tumor from each other. MyPART team members are participating in meetings to talk about our programs. Recent news about the MyPART program and other updates in the study of rare tumors. The MyPART Minute is the monthly newsletter from MyPART. Find archived issues here.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Cancer Prevention Tools for Underserved Communities - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/annual-plan/stories/jennifer
txt: With a postdoctoral grant (K22) from NCI, Jennifer is studying the effect of educating women in rural, segregated communities about cancer screening, specifically for cervical and colon cancers. Experiences that Jennifer Moss, Ph.D., from Penn State College of Medicine, had as a child, while living in a variety of states and communities, showed her that where people live can influence their health. As the first in her family to attend college, she received a fellowship with an organization that focused on underserved and underrepresented students. This led to a bachelor’s degree in psychology and graduate studies in health behavior. Jennifer whittled down her broad interest in women’s health to focus on human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination research, cervical cancer burden, and cancer prevention tools. Encouraged by advisers and mentors, Jennifer applied for and received training support from NCI that included a Cancer Prevention Fellowship nestled between her predoctoral F31 and current postdoctoral K22 grants. It was during the NCI prevention fellowship that Jennifer worked on a study of cancer outcomes in US counties, which was the first to examine how persistent poverty, rural environment, and race work together to produce higher rates of cancer death. The study concluded that multilevel interventions addressing these issues are needed to improve cancer outcomes. The research solidified Jennifer’s interest in the impact of geography on health outcomes in rural areas. “We know we can prevent up to 50% of cancer mortality through behavior change. But it’s hard to change people’s behavior—health-related behaviors in particular,” she reflected. In counties with persistent poverty—of which 85% are rural—creativity is paramount. “These aren’t communities that have a lot of resources that you can connect people with to enhance their health. You have to think more creatively about how to use community assets that are a little less traditional, like churches and community groups.” Jennifer’s research has shown that a one-size-fits-all approach is often ineffective. “Rural communities are different from each other,” Jennifer explained. “Understanding the differences across rural communities that make people more or less likely to get and die from cancer is not only helpful for rural populations, but for the whole country.” She hopes her research will help identify factors that give rise to the burden of cancer disparities. Patients in the rural communities of Pennsylvania where Jennifer works often have limited access to health care services. She collaborates with health centers to get people the clinical cancer prevention services they need. Specifically, Jennifer’s postdoctoral K22 grant studies the effect of providing eligible women in rural, segregated communities with educational materials about cancer screening and self-collected cervical (HPV) and colorectal (fecal immunochemical test [FIT]) cancer screening tests. More than 70% of eligible participants in her study have completed self-sampling tests. She’s elated with this success rate. “Many people have said, ‘I’m so glad to help you figure this out. And I want to help other people who are like me,’” Jennifer said. “They’ve told us about talking with their partners, their parents, their children—it’s opened up conversations about what everyone in the family can do to reduce the risk of cancer.” Jennifer is grateful for NCI’s support. “I can’t overstate the positive impact that NCI has had on my career. It’s allowed me to do innovative research, work with a number of exciting collaborators, and reach out to patients who are often left out of scientific work,” she said. Recently, she received a supplement to her K22 award that supports the continuation of her research while she is on maternity leave. This serves as an example of how NCI supports early-career investigators. For Jennifer, NCI’s support has allowed her “to focus on making sure my science is as good as possible—rigorous, innovative, and impactful—as I try to make a difference in people’s lives and decrease the cancer burden in this country.”
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Discovery – The Link to H.Pylori Bacteria - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/progress/discovery/stomach-cancer
txt: Stomach cancer is the fourth most common cancer worldwide and the second most common cause of cancer death.  In the 1980s a new bacteria Helicobacter pylori (H.pylori), was discovered in patients with gastritis, a precursor to stomach cancer.  NCI has supported basic research to solidify the link between H. pylori infections and stomach cancer and to help develop prevention strategies.  NCI leads the fight against stomach cancer through research that will help identify patients who are more likely to develop stomach cancer.  In 1984, two Australian scientists, Dr. Barry J. Marshall and Dr. J. Robin Warren, discovered a bacteria in patients with gastritis. Going against the prevailing medical thinking of the time, the researchers hypothesized that this bacteria and not psychological stress caused gastritis and ulcers. Although the medical community was skeptical, NCI began supporting studies to test this novel hypothesis. This support included basic research in new animal models that demonstrated that H. pylori infections contribute to gastritis. NCI researchers now use these animal models to: examine modes of infection  test screening and treatment strategies  study the immune response to H. pylori infections  Once H. pylori infections were linked to gastritis, researchers began to suspect a connection between the bacteria and stomach cancer. For example, NCI supported a key study that provided the first strong evidence that people infected with H. pylori bacteria are much more likely to be diagnosed with stomach cancer. The findings from additional studies now suggest that people infected with H. pylori are six times more likely to develop stomach cancer than people not infected. Recent studies of these types of cancers indicate that nearly 90 percent of these cancers are associated with H. pylori infections. The link between H. pylori infections and stomach cancer was discovered at the same time as the link between viral infections and other types of cancer. This discovery marked a major shift in the way scientists viewed cancer. New cancer treatment and prevention strategies were developed to address these potentially treatable or preventable infections that are at the root of some cancers. These discoveries also sparked breakthroughs in other types of cancer as scientists began to carefully examine other viral and bacterial connections. Stomach cancer is the fourth most common cancer worldwide and the second most common cause of cancer death globally. The connection between H. pylori infection and stomach cancer fueled a need for noninvasive screening methods for the bacteria. Through NCI support, numerous screening methods were developed, allowing researchers to screen large numbers of people and gather epidemiological data that will improve our current understanding of stomach cancer worldwide. The widespread occurrence of H. pylori infections also spurred the development of strategies to eradicate the bacteria, with the overall aim of reducing the occurrence and recurrence of stomach cancer. Early NCI-supported animal studies suggested that antibiotics could be effective. Building on these findings, NCI supported the Shandong Intervention Trial, which tested a short-term antibiotic treatment for H. pylori infections. The results showed a reduction in the percentage of the participants with precancerous stomach lesions. Follow-up nearly 15 years later showed that the antibiotic treatment significantly reduced the number of new cases of stomach cancer. A similar trend was also seen for reducing deaths caused by stomach cancer. These results appear to support early treatment strategies to eradicate the H. pylori bacteria. However, using these treatment strategies is challenging. Sometimes H. pylori infections are antibiotic resistant and people can become reinfected. The high cost of extensive antibiotic treatment also may make it impractical to provide it to all patients who have H. pylori infections. H. pylori bacteria affect nearly half of the world's population. Remarkably, only a small percentage of individuals who are infected develop gastritis, ulcers, and stomach cancer. This finding indicates that while having H. pylori may increase a person's chance of having stomach cancer in the future, it is not the sole cause of the disease. Researchers are now looking for small genetic differences in people that affect the way they fight off bacterial infections. Finding these differences may allow clinicians to limit antibiotic treatment to high-risk patients and reduce the risk of generating strains of H. pylori bacteria that are resistant to treatment. Researchers are also examining the genetic difference between harmful and harmless versions of bacteria. These studies will help clinicians screen patients for the most dangerous types of H. pylori bacteria. NCI-supported researchers also are working to develop a vaccine to prevent H. pylori infections. The overall goal of this research is to dramatically reduce the number of new cases of stomach cancer. NCI has supported a variety of projects that have helped broaden our understanding of H. pylori and stomach cancer. The non-invasive screening methods developed are integral in monitoring effectiveness of H. pylori eradication strategies and will be essential for identifying people at the highest risk of developing H. pylori mediated stomach cancer. The renowned Cancer Genome Atlas program seeks to find answers to some of these questions by analyzing the genetic variations of stomach cancer. Another project is the Human Microbiome Project, through which NCI and its partners are supporting the characterization of bacterial species, including H. pylori, within the stomach. This will greatly improve understanding of the complex bacterial interactions that contribute to stomach cancer. Finally, investigators across NCI have organized the Esophago-Gastric Cancer Task Force, which facilitates quality investigations in gastrointestinal cancer clinical research. New cancer treatment and prevention strategies are addressing potentially treatable or preventable infections at the root of some stomach cancer. These discoveries have sparked breakthroughs in other types of cancer as scientists carefully examine other cancers for viral and bacterial connections. Lee A, Fox JG, Otto G, Murphy J. A small animal model of human Heliobacter pylori active chronic gastritis. Gastroenterology. 1990;99(5):1315-1323. [PUBMED Abstract] Ma JL, Zhang L, Brown LM, et al. Fifteen-year effects of Heliobacter pylori, garlic, and vitamin treatments on gastric cancer incidence and mortality. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012;104(6):488-492. [PUBMED Abstract] Parsonnet J, Friedman GD, Vandersteen DP, et al. Heliobacter pylori infection and the risk of gastric carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 1991;325(16):1127-1131. [PUBMED Abstract]
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Image-guided diagnosis of prostate cancer can increase detection of tumors - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2015/prostatefusiontargetedbiopsyjama
txt:  Posted:
January 27, 2015  240-760-6600 In the largest prospective study to date of image-guided technology for identifying suspicious regions of the prostate to biopsy, researchers compared the ability of this technology to detect high-risk prostate cancer with that of the current standard of unguided prostate biopsy. The image-guided approach, called MR/US fusion biopsy, combines targeted magnetic resonance (MR) imaging with transrectal ultrasound (US) to identify regions of suspected cancer to biopsy, whereas the current standard of detection, performed with ultrasound alone, involves biopsy of the entire prostate with twelve needles to remove core samples from separate areas of the organ. In this study, researchers at the National Cancer Institute (NCI) enrolled 1,003 men between 2007 and 2014; the men underwent both targeted and standard unguided biopsies to detect the presence of prostate cancer. To be enrolled in the study, men had to have either an elevated PSA (prostate specific antigen) level or an abnormal result via a digital rectal exam, often with a history of a negative finding on a previous standard biopsy. This study appeared January 28, 2015, in JAMA. The researchers also compared the ability of the image-guided and standard approach to predict the presence of cancer in surgically-removed prostate glands. The results of the study showed that targeted MR/US fusion biopsy diagnosed 30 percent more high-risk cancers than standard biopsy and 17 percent fewer low-risk cancers. In addition, targeted biopsy was more accurate than standard biopsy or both biopsy methods together at identifying intermediate to high-risk disease within the entire prostate after prostatectomy. When compared to standard biopsy, targeted biopsy was able to best guide the decision in whom to recommend for surgery. Ultimately, this study showed that targeted biopsy could identify more men with high-risk disease that were missed by the standard biopsy while reducing the detection of low risk disease. These improvements in risk stratification could translate into clinical benefits for men. According to the investigators, headed by Peter A. Pinto, M.D., NCI, the findings provide a strong rationale for conducting future clinical trials to determine if targeted biopsy reduces disease recurrence and death from prostate cancer. Cost will also be a consideration for future analyses since the greatest increase in cost was due to the MRI performed on each patient; other studies have shown that when the benefits of improved risk stratification are considered, the expected costs per patient are equal to that of standard biopsy procedures. Future studies will be needed to assess the ultimate clinical implications of targeted biopsy.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: I-131 Radiation Exposure from Fallout - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/radiation/i-131
txt: Use the Thyroid Dose/Risk Calculator
This calculator estimates radiation dose and risk of developing thyroid cancer from fallout exposure from nuclear tests. During the Cold War in the mid-1940s through early 1960s, the U.S. government conducted about 100 nuclear weapons (atomic bomb) tests in the atmosphere at a test site in Nevada, more than 100 in the Pacific, and one—the first ever—in New Mexico. The radioactive substances released by these tests are known as "fallout." They were carried thousands of miles away from the test site by winds. As a result, people living in the United States at the time of the testing were exposed to varying levels of radiation. Among the numerous radioactive substances released in fallout, there has been a great deal of concern about and study of one radioactive form of iodine--called iodine-131, or I-131. I-131 collects in the thyroid gland. People exposed to I-131, especially during childhood, may have an increased risk of thyroid disease, including thyroid cancer. Thyroid cancer is uncommon and is usually curable. Typically, it is a slow-growing cancer that is highly treatable. About 98 out of 100 people who are diagnosed with thyroid cancer survive the disease for at least five years after diagnosis. The thyroid controls many body processes, including heart rate, blood pressure, and body temperature, as well as childhood growth and development. It is located in the front of the neck, just above the top of the breastbone and overlying the windpipe. Although the potential of developing thyroid cancer from exposure to I-131 from nuclear weapons testing is small, it is important for Americans who grew up during the atomic bomb testing between 1945 and 1963 to be aware of risks. Because of wind and rainfall patterns, the distribution of I-131 fallout varied widely after each test. Therefore, although all areas of the United States received fallout from at least one nuclear weapons test, certain areas of North America received more fallout than others. Scientists estimate that the larger amounts of I-131 from the Nevada test site fell over some parts of Utah, Colorado, Idaho, Nevada, and Montana. But I-131 traveled to all states, particularly those in the Midwestern, Eastern, and Northeastern United States. Some of the I-131 collected on pastures and on grasses. Depending on the location, grazing cows and goats sometimes consumed contaminated grasses resulting in I-131 collecting in the animals' milk. Much of the health risk associated with I-131 occurred among milk-drinkers--usually children. From what is known about thyroid cancer and radiation, scientists think that people who were children during the period of atomic bomb testing are at higher risk for developing thyroid cancer. In addition to nuclear testing in Nevada, the Pacific, and New Mexico, Americans were potentially exposed to I-131 from a number of events, including: Nuclear testing by other nations elsewhere in the world (mainly in the 1950s and 1960s)  Nuclear power plant accidents (such as the Chernobyl accident in 1986 and the Fukushima accident in 2011 (primarily Americans in Japan)  Releases from atomic weapons production plants (such as the Hanford facility in Washington state from 1944 to 1957)  Scientists are working to find out more about ways to measure and address potential I-131 exposure. They are also working to find out more about other radioactive substances released by fallout and their possible effects on human health. Congress directed government health agencies to investigate the I-131 problem many years ago, and to make recommendations to Americans who might have related health risks. Gathering information turned out to be very complicated. Record-keeping was incomplete at the time of the bomb testing. Much of the information needed to calculate an individual's dose of I-131 and associated risk is either unreliable or unavailable. Despite such challenges, government agencies organized expert scientific teams that have devoted many years to learning more about I-131. A number of reports have been published documenting what they have learned (1997, 1999). This information was put together to educate the American people about the potential health risks from exposure to I-131 from nuclear weapons testing. The "active" in "radioactive" means that unstable substances produced in nuclear reactions break down and change, so that they eventually become stable and no longer release radiation. The rate of breakdown can occur quickly in some radioactive substances, often within a few days. Half of the I-131 released during each atomic bomb test was gone in about 8 days. Almost all of it was gone (less than 1 percent remained) 80 days after the test. Like all radioactive substances, I-131 releases radiation as it breaks down. It is this radiation that can injure human tissues. But I-131's steady breakdown means that the amount of I-131 present in the environment after a bomb test steadily decreased. Therefore, farm animals that grazed in fields within a few days after a test would have consumed higher levels of I-131 than animals grazing later. People younger than 15 at the time of aboveground testing (between 1945 and 1963) who drank milk, and who lived in the Mountain West, Midwestern, Eastern, and Northeastern United States, probably have a higher thyroid cancer risk from exposure to I-131 in fallout than people who lived in other parts of the United States, who were over the age of 15 in the 1940s, or who did not drink milk. Their thyroid glands were still developing during the testing period. And they were more likely to have consumed milk contaminated with I-131. The amount of I-131 people absorbed depends on: Their age during the testing period (between 1945 and 1963)  The amount and source of milk they drank in those years  Where they lived during the testing period  Age and residence during those years are usually known. But few people can recall the exact amounts or sources of the milk they drank as children. While the amount of milk consumed is important in determining exposure to I-131, it is also important to know the source of the milk. Fresh milk from backyard or farm cows and goats usually contained more I-131 than store-bought milk. This is because processing and shipping milk allowed more time for the I-131 to break down. There are two main types of thyroid diseases: Noncancerous Thyroid Disease Some thyroid diseases are caused by changes in the amount of thyroid hormones that enter the body from the thyroid gland. Doctors can screen for these with a simple blood test. Noncancerous thyroid disease also includes lumps, or nodules, in the thyroid gland that are benign and not cancerous. Thyroid Cancer Thyroid cancer occurs when a lump, or nodule, in the thyroid gland is cancerous. Thyroid cancer accounts for a little less than 4 percent of all cancers diagnosed in the United States. Incidence has been going up in recent years, in part due to increased detection. Researchers suspect that rising rates of obesity are also influencing rates. However, these two factors do not fully explain the increases. Typically, thyroid cancer is slow-growing, highly treatable, and usually curable. About 98 out of 100 people who are diagnosed with thyroid cancer survive the disease for at least five years, and about 92 out of 100 people survive the disease for at least 20 years after diagnosis. The cause of most cases of thyroid cancer is not known. Exposure to I-131 can increase the risk of thyroid cancer. It is thought that risk is higher for people who have had multiple exposures and for people exposed at a younger age. But even among people who have documented exposures to I-131, few develop this cancer. It is known that children have a higher-than-average risk of developing thyroid cancer many years later if they were exposed to radiation. This knowledge comes from studies of people exposed to x-ray treatments for childhood cancer or noncancerous head and neck conditions, or as a result of direct radiation from the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The thyroid gland in adults, however, appears to be more resistant to the effects of radiation. There appears to be little risk of developing thyroid cancer from exposure to I-131 or other radiation sources as an adult. For more on thyroid cancer, see NCI’s Thyroid Cancer page. How can people reach a sound decision about their risk of thyroid cancer? When is it time to visit a doctor? A "personal risk profile" includes four key points that may influence a person's decision to visit a doctor or other health professional for evaluation: Age—People who were born between 1936 and 1963 and were children at the time of testing are at higher risk.  Milk drinking—Childhood milk drinkers, particularly those who drank large quantities of milk or those who drank unprocessed milk from farm or backyard cows and goats, have increased risk.  Childhood residence—The Mountain West, Midwest, East, and Northeast areas of the United States generally were more affected by I-131 fallout from nuclear testing.  Medical signs—A lump or nodule that an individual can see or feel in the area of the thyroid gland requires attention. If you can see or feel a lump or nodule, it is important that you see a doctor.  Scientists know that: I-131 breaks down rapidly in the atmosphere and environment  Exposure was highest in the first few days after each nuclear test explosion  Most exposure occurred through drinking fresh milk  People received little exposure from eating fruits and leafy vegetables as compared to drinking fresh milk because although I-131 was deposited on fruits and leafy vegetables, the I-131 in fallout was deposited only on the surface; people generally wash or peel fruits and leafy vegetables  Thyroid cancer is uncommon, usually curable, and approximately 2 to 3 times more common in women  Reliable information about I-131's impact on human health has been difficult to collect, but scientists think that: Risk for thyroid cancer increases with exposure, but even among people exposed to I-131, few develop this cancer  People exposed as children have a higher risk than people exposed as adults  Key steps to estimating personal risk of thyroid cancer, and taking charge of personal thyroid health include: Using the "personal risk profile" described above (see Who's at Risk?)  Using the thyroid dose and risk calculator to estimate radiation dose and risk of developing thyroid cancer from fallout exposure from nuclear tests  Taking this material to a health care professional to discuss dose estimates and steps—if any—required for further evaluation  Getting more information by calling NCI's Cancer Information Service at 1-800-4-CANCER 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Terminal Cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/advanced-cancer
txt: Advanced cancer is a broadly used term that can mean different things. Often health care providers use it for cancer that is unlikely to be cured. However, some advanced cancers can be controlled for many years with treatment and, in some cases, cured. Those that cannot be controlled with treatment are often called end-stage cancer or terminal cancer. Advanced cancer may also be used to describe cancers that have spread to nearby tissues or elsewhere in the body. The following sections are specific to those with end-stage cancer. They may help you deal with the many changes that come with this diagnosis. Learn more about ways you can help yourself and perhaps ease some of your concerns. If you're a young adult with end-stage cancer you may find this page helpful: Young People Facing End-of-Life Care Decisions. If you're a parent whose child has cancer, this guide, Children with Cancer: A Guide for Parents has a chapter on end-of-life care and ways to help your child. People with cancer have different goals for their care. Review the choices you can make for your medical care once you learn you have advanced cancer. Learn about ways to talk to your doctor and loved ones, and how to receive support. Many people with advanced cancer experience a range of emotions. You will see that you are not alone. Careful planning can reduce burdens your family may face later. Planning may include financial and legal issues, organizing records for loved ones, and completing advance directives. Having advanced cancer often causes people to look more deeply for their purpose in life. This may include exploring their spirituality, reflecting on their life, and looking at ways to create a legacy. If you’re a caregiver, you may be tired and worried as you cope with your loved one’s cancer. This section addresses how caring for someone with advanced cancer brings new challenges and concerns. If you learn that you have advanced cancer, you will have choices to make about your care and the next steps you should take. For many, it’s hard to know what questions to ask about what these steps should be. This section may guide you in your talks with your doctor.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Darolutamide - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/darolutamide
txt: This page contains brief information about darolutamide
         (Nubeqa) and a collection of links to more information about the use of 
         this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Darolutamide
         is approved to treat:  Prostate cancer. It is used in adults whose cancer:Has spread to other parts of the body and responds to treatment that lowers testosterone levels. It is used with docetaxel.Has not spread to other parts of the body and no longer responds to treatment that lowers testosterone levels.  Has spread to other parts of the body and responds to treatment that lowers testosterone levels. It is used with docetaxel. Has not spread to other parts of the body and no longer responds to treatment that lowers testosterone levels. Darolutamide
         is also being studied in the treatment of other types of
         cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Darolutamide - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Targeted Cancer Therapies Darolutamide Extends Survival for Some People with Metastatic Prostate Cancer Hormone Therapy for Prostate Cancer Find Clinical Trials for Darolutamide - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: COVID-19 Funding Announcements and Notices - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/key-initiatives/covid-19/funding
txt: When the pandemic began, NCI issued and revised certain existing grants and cooperative agreements to make funds available to study COVID-19. Open and closed funding notices are listed below. Notice of Intent to Publish a Funding Opportunity Announcement for Serological Sciences Centers of Excellence
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Breast Cancer Treatment During Pregnancy (PDQ®) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/breast/hp/pregnancy-breast-treatment-pdq
txt:  General Information About Breast Cancer Treatment During Pregnancy  Stage Information  for  Breast Cancer Treatment and Pregnancy  Treatment of Early/Localized/Operable Breast Cancer During Pregnancy  Treatment of Advanced Breast Cancer During Pregnancy  Special Considerations for Pregnancy and Breast Cancer  Latest Updates to This Summary (08/22/2023)  About This PDQ Summary  Incidence Anatomy Diagnostic Evaluation Prognosis Breast cancer is the most common cancer in pregnant and postpartum women and occurs in about 1 in 3,000 pregnant women.  The average patient is between the ages of 32 years and 38 years. Because many women are choosing to delay childbearing, it is
likely that the incidence of breast cancer during pregnancy will increase. EnlargeAnatomy of the female breast. The nipple and areola are shown on the outside of the breast. The lymph nodes, lobes, lobules, ducts, and other parts of the inside of the breast are also shown. The natural tenderness and engorgement of the breasts of pregnant and lactating
women may hinder detection of discrete masses and early diagnosis
of breast cancer.  Delays in diagnosis are common, with an average reported
delay of 5 to 15 months from the onset of symptoms.[1-4]  Because of this
delay, cancers are typically detected at a later stage than in a nonpregnant,
age-matched population.[5] The following tests and procedures may be used to diagnose breast cancer during pregnancy: Breast self-examination. Clinical breast examination. Ultrasound. Biopsy and hormone receptor assays. Mammography. To detect breast cancer, pregnant and lactating
women should consider practicing self-examination and undergo a clinical breast examination as part
of the routine prenatal examination by a doctor.  If an abnormality is found,
diagnostic approaches such as ultrasound and mammography may be used.  With
proper shielding, mammography poses little risk of radiation exposure to the
fetus.[6]  Mammograms are only used, however,  to evaluate dominant masses
and to locate occult carcinomas in the presence of other suspicious physical
findings.[6] Because at least 25% of mammograms in pregnancy may be negative in
the presence of cancer, a biopsy is essential for the diagnosis of any palpable
mass.  Diagnosis may be safely accomplished with a fine-needle aspiration, core biopsy, or
excisional biopsy under local anesthesia.  To avoid a false-positive diagnosis
as a result of misinterpretation of pregnancy-related changes, the pathologist
should be advised that the patient is pregnant.[7] Breast cancer pathology is similar in age-matched pregnant and nonpregnant
women.  Hormone receptor assays using a competitive binding assay are usually negative in pregnant patients with breast cancer, but this may be the result of receptor binding by high serum estrogen
levels associated with the pregnancy.  Enzyme immunocytochemical
receptor assays  are more sensitive than competitive binding assays.  A study
that used both assay methods indicated similar receptor positivity between pregnant
and nonpregnant women with breast cancer.[8]  The study concluded that
increased estrogen levels during pregnancy could result in a higher incidence
of receptor positivity detected with immunohistochemistry than is detected by
radiolabeled ligand-binding assay because of competitive inhibition by high levels of
endogenous estrogen. For more information, see the Diagnosis section in Breast Cancer Treatment. Overall survival of pregnant women with breast cancer may be worse than survival of nonpregnant women at all stages;[6]  however, this may be primarily the result of  delayed diagnosis.[9]
Termination of pregnancy has not been shown to have any beneficial effect on
breast cancer outcome and is not usually considered as a therapeutic
option.[1,2,4,10,11] Hoover HC: Breast cancer during pregnancy and lactation. Surg Clin North Am 70 (5): 1151-63, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Gwyn K, Theriault R: Breast cancer during pregnancy. Oncology (Huntingt) 15 (1): 39-46; discussion 46, 49-51, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Moore HC, Foster RS: Breast cancer and pregnancy. Semin Oncol 27 (6): 646-53, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Rugo HS: Management of breast cancer diagnosed during pregnancy. Curr Treat Options Oncol 4 (2): 165-73, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Clark RM, Chua T: Breast cancer and pregnancy: the ultimate challenge. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) 1 (1): 11-8, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Yang WT, Dryden MJ, Gwyn K, et al.: Imaging of breast cancer diagnosed and treated with chemotherapy during pregnancy. Radiology 239 (1): 52-60, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Middleton LP, Amin M, Gwyn K, et al.: Breast carcinoma in pregnant women: assessment of clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical features. Cancer 98 (5): 1055-60, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Elledge RM, Ciocca DR, Langone G, et al.: Estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER-2/neu protein in breast cancers from pregnant patients. Cancer 71 (8): 2499-506, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Petrek JA, Dukoff R, Rogatko A: Prognosis of pregnancy-associated breast cancer. Cancer 67 (4): 869-72, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Barnavon Y, Wallack MK: Management of the pregnant patient with carcinoma of the breast. Surg Gynecol Obstet 171 (4): 347-52, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Gallenberg MM, Loprinzi CL: Breast cancer and pregnancy. Semin Oncol 16 (5): 369-76, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Staging Evaluation American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Stage Groupings and Definitions of TNM The following procedures are used to determine the extent of the cancer: Chest x-ray. Bone scan. Ultrasound of the liver. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain. Procedures used for determining the stage of breast cancer are modified for pregnant women to avoid
radiation exposure to the fetus.  Nuclear scans cause fetal
radiation exposure.[1]  If such scans are essential for evaluation, hydration and
Foley catheter drainage of the bladder can be used to prevent retention of
radioactivity.  Timing of the exposure to radiation relative to the gestational
age of the fetus may be more critical than the actual dose of radiation
delivered.[2]  Radiation exposure during the first trimester (>0.1 Gy) may lead to
congenital malformations, intellectual disability, and increased relative risk of carcinogenesis. Chest x-rays with abdominal shielding are considered
safe, but as with all radiologic procedures, they are used only when
essential for making treatment decisions.[1,3]  A chest x-ray delivers 0.00008 Gy.[4] For the diagnosis of bone
metastases, a bone scan is preferable to a skeletal series because the bone
scan delivers a smaller amount of radiation and is more sensitive.  A bone scan
delivers 0.001 Gy.[5] Evaluation
of the liver can be performed with ultrasound, and brain metastases can be
diagnosed with an MRI scan.   Data on MRI during pregnancy are not available, but gadolinium crosses the placenta and is associated with fetal abnormalities in rats.[5] For more information, see the Stage Information for Breast Cancer section in Breast Cancer Treatment. Gwyn K, Theriault R: Breast cancer during pregnancy. Oncology (Huntingt) 15 (1): 39-46; discussion 46, 49-51, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Barnavon Y, Wallack MK: Management of the pregnant patient with carcinoma of the breast. Surg Gynecol Obstet 171 (4): 347-52, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Nicklas AH, Baker ME: Imaging strategies in the pregnant cancer patient. Semin Oncol 27 (6): 623-32, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Gallenberg MM, Loprinzi CL: Breast cancer and pregnancy. Semin Oncol 16 (5): 369-76, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Yang WT, Dryden MJ, Gwyn K, et al.: Imaging of breast cancer diagnosed and treated with chemotherapy during pregnancy. Radiology 239 (1): 52-60, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Surgery Chemotherapy Endocrine Therapy Targeted Therapy Generally, pregnant women with stage I or stage II breast cancer are treated in the same way as nonpregnant patients, with 
some modifications to protect the fetus. Treatment options for early/localized/operable breast cancer in pregnant women include the following: Surgery. Postpartum radiation therapy may also be given to women diagnosed with breast cancer late in pregnancy. Chemotherapy (after the first trimester). Endocrine therapy (after delivery). The use of trastuzumab during pregnancy is contraindicated. Surgery is recommended as the primary treatment of breast cancer in pregnant
women. The data 
regarding safety of sentinel lymph node biopsy in pregnant patients are limited to several retrospective case 
series.  One study examined sentinel lymph node biopsy in eight  patients in the first trimester, nine patients in the second trimester,
and eight  patients in the third 
trimester.  Technetium Tc 99m alone was used in 16 patients, methylene blue dye alone 
was used in seven patients, and two patients had unknown mapping methods.  All 25 patients had live-born infants, 
of whom 24 were healthy, and one had a cleft palate (in the setting of other maternal risk factors).[1] Because radiation in therapeutic doses may expose the fetus to
potentially harmful scatter radiation,[2]  modified radical mastectomy is the
treatment of choice if the breast cancer was diagnosed early in 
pregnancy.  If diagnosed late in pregnancy, breast-conserving surgery with postpartum radiation therapy
has been used for breast preservation.[3]  An analysis has been performed that
helps to  predict the risk of waiting to have radiation.[4,5] Data suggest that it is safe to administer certain chemotherapeutic drugs after the first trimester, with most pregnancies resulting in live births with low
 rates of morbidity in the newborns. Anthracycline-based 
chemotherapy (doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide or fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and 
cyclophosphamide [FAC]) appears to be safe to administer during the second and/or third trimester 
on the basis of  limited prospective data.[6-8] Safety data on the use of taxanes during pregnancy are limited. Evidence (use of chemotherapy during the second and/or third trimester of pregnancy): A multicenter 
case-control study compared pediatric outcomes of 129 children whose mothers had breast cancer 
with  matched children of women without cancer. 
 In the pregnancy study group, 96 children 
(74.4%) were exposed to chemotherapy, 11 (8.5%) to radiation therapy, 13 (10.1%) to surgery alone, 2 
(1.7%) to other drug treatments, and 14 (10.9%) to no treatment.[9]The study 
showed that there was no 
significant difference in birth weight below the 10th
 percentile (22% in the breast cancer treatment‒exposed 
group vs. 15.2% in the control group,  P = .16) or in cognitive development based on the Bayley 
score (P = .08). The gestational age at birth was correlated with cognitive outcome in the two study 
groups.Evaluation of cardiac function among 47 children, who were age 36 months in the study group, showed 
normal cardiac findings. In a prospective
 single-arm study, 57 pregnant patients 
with breast cancer were treated with FAC in the adjuvant or neoadjuvant
 setting.[6]Survey data 
collected when the children were aged 2 months to 157 months revealed that no stillbirths, miscarriages, or 
perinatal deaths occurred.One child born vaginally at a gestational age of 38 weeks had a 
subarachnoid hemorrhage on day 2 postpartum, one child 
had Down syndrome, and two children had congenital 
anomalies (club foot and bilateral ureteral reflux). The findings of the prospective single-arm study above were consistent with other smaller 
retrospective series of anthracycline-based chemotherapy.[7,8] A systematic review studied 40 case 
reports of taxane administration during the second or 
third trimesters of pregnancy.[10]Minimal maternal, fetal, or neonatal toxicity 
was observed. The study 
showed that there was no 
significant difference in birth weight below the 10th
 percentile (22% in the breast cancer treatment‒exposed 
group vs. 15.2% in the control group,  P = .16) or in cognitive development based on the Bayley 
score (P = .08). The gestational age at birth was correlated with cognitive outcome in the two study 
groups. Evaluation of cardiac function among 47 children, who were age 36 months in the study group, showed 
normal cardiac findings. Survey data 
collected when the children were aged 2 months to 157 months revealed that no stillbirths, miscarriages, or 
perinatal deaths occurred. One child born vaginally at a gestational age of 38 weeks had a 
subarachnoid hemorrhage on day 2 postpartum, one child 
had Down syndrome, and two children had congenital 
anomalies (club foot and bilateral ureteral reflux). Minimal maternal, fetal, or neonatal toxicity 
was observed. Endocrine therapy is generally avoided
 until after delivery.  Case reports and a literature review of 
tamoxifen during pregnancy show that tamoxifen administration during pregnancy is associated with vaginal bleeding, miscarriage, congenital 
abnormalities such as  Goldenhar syndrome, and fetal death.[11-13]  Breastfeeding is also not recommended 
concurrently with endocrine therapy.[14] The use of trastuzumab during pregnancy is contraindicated
 based on results of a systematic review of 
17 studies (18 pregnancies, 19 newborns).[15] Of the fetal 
complications noted, occurrence of oligohydramnios/anhydramnios was the most common (61.1%) 
adverse event. Of the pregnancies exposed to trastuzumab during the second or third trimester, 73.3% of the pregnancies  were 
complicated with oligohydramnios/anhydramnios. Of the pregnancies exposed to 
trastuzumab exclusively during the first trimester, 0%
 (P = .043) of the pregnancies were complicated with oligohydramnios/anhydramnios. The mean gestational age at 
delivery was 33.8 weeks, and the mean weight of newborns at delivery was 2,261 grams or 4.984 pounds. In 52.6% of 
cases, a healthy neonate was born. At the long-term evaluation, all children who were without complications at birth 
were healthy, with a median follow-up of 9 months, and four of nine children with complications at birth 
had died within an interval ranging from birth to  5.25 months. All children exposed to trastuzumab in 
utero exclusively in the first trimester were completely 
healthy at birth. The data suggest that for women 
who become pregnant during trastuzumab administration and wish to 
continue pregnancy, trastuzumab should be stopped and pregnancy would be allowed to continue. Gropper AB, Calvillo KZ, Dominici L, et al.: Sentinel lymph node biopsy in pregnant women with breast cancer. Ann Surg Oncol 21 (8): 2506-11, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Kal HB, Struikmans H: Radiotherapy during pregnancy: fact and fiction. Lancet Oncol 6 (5): 328-33, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Gwyn K, Theriault R: Breast cancer during pregnancy. Oncology (Huntingt) 15 (1): 39-46; discussion 46, 49-51, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Nettleton J, Long J, Kuban D, et al.: Breast cancer during pregnancy: quantifying the risk of treatment delay. Obstet Gynecol 87 (3): 414-8, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Kuerer HM, Gwyn K, Ames FC, et al.: Conservative surgery and chemotherapy for breast carcinoma during pregnancy. Surgery 131 (1): 108-10, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Hahn KM, Johnson PH, Gordon N, et al.: Treatment of pregnant breast cancer patients and outcomes of children exposed to chemotherapy in utero. Cancer 107 (6): 1219-26, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Turchi JJ, Villasis C: Anthracyclines in the treatment of malignancy in pregnancy. Cancer 61 (3): 435-40, 1988. [PUBMED Abstract] Zemlickis D, Lishner M, Degendorfer P, et al.: Fetal outcome after in utero exposure to cancer chemotherapy. Arch Intern Med 152 (3): 573-6, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Amant F, Vandenbroucke T, Verheecke M, et al.: Pediatric Outcome after Maternal Cancer Diagnosed during Pregnancy. N Engl J Med 373 (19): 1824-34, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Mir O, Berveiller P, Goffinet F, et al.: Taxanes for breast cancer during pregnancy: a systematic review. Ann Oncol 21 (2): 425-6, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Cullins SL, Pridjian G, Sutherland CM: Goldenhar's syndrome associated with tamoxifen given to the mother during gestation. JAMA 271 (24): 1905-6, 1994 Jun 22-29. [PUBMED Abstract] Tewari K, Bonebrake RG, Asrat T, et al.: Ambiguous genitalia in infant exposed to tamoxifen in utero. Lancet 350 (9072): 183, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Isaacs RJ, Hunter W, Clark K: Tamoxifen as systemic treatment of advanced breast cancer during pregnancy--case report and literature review. Gynecol Oncol 80 (3): 405-8, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Helewa M, Lévesque P, Provencher D, et al.: Breast cancer, pregnancy, and breastfeeding. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 24 (2): 164-80; quiz 181-4, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Zagouri F, Sergentanis TN, Chrysikos D, et al.: Trastuzumab administration during pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Breast Cancer Res Treat 137 (2): 349-57, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] There is no standard treatment for patients with advanced (stage III or stage IV) breast cancer during pregnancy. Most studies show a 5-year survival rate of 10% in pregnant
patients with stage III or IV disease. First-trimester radiation therapy should be avoided.  Chemotherapy may be given
after the first trimester as discussed in the section on Early/Localized/Operable Breast Cancer During Pregnancy. Because the mother's life span may be
limited, and there is a risk of fetal damage
with treatment during the first trimester,[1,2] issues regarding continuation of
the pregnancy should be discussed with the patient and her family.  Therapeutic
abortion does not improve prognosis.[1-5] Hoover HC: Breast cancer during pregnancy and lactation. Surg Clin North Am 70 (5): 1151-63, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Rugo HS: Management of breast cancer diagnosed during pregnancy. Curr Treat Options Oncol 4 (2): 165-73, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Gwyn K, Theriault R: Breast cancer during pregnancy. Oncology (Huntingt) 15 (1): 39-46; discussion 46, 49-51, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Clark RM, Chua T: Breast cancer and pregnancy: the ultimate challenge. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) 1 (1): 11-8, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Barnavon Y, Wallack MK: Management of the pregnant patient with carcinoma of the breast. Surg Gynecol Obstet 171 (4): 347-52, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Lactation Fetal Consequences of Maternal Breast Cancer Pregnancy in Patients With a History of Breast Cancer Suppression of lactation does not improve prognosis. If surgery  is
planned, however, lactation is suppressed to decrease the size and vascularity of
the breasts.  If chemotherapy is to be given, lactation is also suppressed because many antineoplastic agents (i.e., cyclophosphamide and methotrexate), when 
given systemically,  may occur in high levels in breast milk and would
affect the nursing baby.  Women receiving chemotherapy should not
breastfeed.[1] No damaging effects on the fetus from maternal breast cancer have been
demonstrated,[2] and there are no reported cases of maternal-fetal transfer of
breast cancer cells. Based on limited retrospective data, pregnancy does not appear to compromise the survival of women with a previous
history of breast cancer, and no
deleterious effects have been demonstrated in the fetus.[3-11]  Some
physicians recommend that patients wait 2 years after diagnosis before
attempting to conceive.  This allows early recurrence to become manifest, which
may influence the decision to become a parent. Little is known about pregnancy
after bone marrow transplant and high-dose chemotherapy with or without
total-body irradiation.  In one report of pregnancies after bone marrow
transplant for hematologic disorders, a 25% incidence of preterm labor and low
birth weight for gestational-age infants was noted.[12] Helewa M, Lévesque P, Provencher D, et al.: Breast cancer, pregnancy, and breastfeeding. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 24 (2): 164-80; quiz 181-4, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Amant F, Vandenbroucke T, Verheecke M, et al.: Pediatric Outcome after Maternal Cancer Diagnosed during Pregnancy. N Engl J Med 373 (19): 1824-34, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Clark RM, Chua T: Breast cancer and pregnancy: the ultimate challenge. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) 1 (1): 11-8, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Harvey JC, Rosen PP, Ashikari R, et al.: The effect of pregnancy on the prognosis of carcinoma of the breast following radical mastectomy. Surg Gynecol Obstet 153 (5): 723-5, 1981. [PUBMED Abstract] Petrek JA: Pregnancy safety after breast cancer. Cancer 74 (1 Suppl): 528-31, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] von Schoultz E, Johansson H, Wilking N, et al.: Influence of prior and subsequent pregnancy on breast cancer prognosis. J Clin Oncol 13 (2): 430-4, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Kroman N, Mouridsen HT: Prognostic influence of pregnancy before, around, and after diagnosis of breast cancer. Breast 12 (6): 516-21, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Malamos NA, Stathopoulos GP, Keramopoulos A, et al.: Pregnancy and offspring after the appearance of breast cancer. Oncology 53 (6): 471-5, 1996 Nov-Dec. [PUBMED Abstract] Gelber S, Coates AS, Goldhirsch A, et al.: Effect of pregnancy on overall survival after the diagnosis of early-stage breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 19 (6): 1671-5, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Gwyn K, Theriault R: Breast cancer during pregnancy. Oncology (Huntingt) 15 (1): 39-46; discussion 46, 49-51, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Rugo HS: Management of breast cancer diagnosed during pregnancy. Curr Treat Options Oncol 4 (2): 165-73, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Sanders JE, Hawley J, Levy W, et al.: Pregnancies following high-dose cyclophosphamide with or without high-dose busulfan or total-body irradiation and bone marrow transplantation. Blood 87 (7): 3045-52, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] The PDQ cancer information summaries are reviewed regularly and updated as
new information becomes available.  This section describes the latest
changes made to this summary as of the date above. Editorial changes were made to this summary. This summary is written and maintained by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board, which is
editorially independent of NCI.  The summary reflects an independent review of
the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or NIH.  More
information about summary policies and the role of the PDQ Editorial Boards  in
maintaining the PDQ summaries can be found on the About This PDQ Summary and PDQ® Cancer Information for Health Professionals pages. This PDQ cancer information summary for health professionals provides comprehensive, peer-reviewed, evidence-based information about the treatment of breast cancer during pregnancy. It is intended as a resource to inform and assist clinicians in the care of their patients.  It does not provide formal guidelines or recommendations for making health care decisions. This summary is reviewed regularly and updated as necessary by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board, which is editorially independent of the National Cancer Institute (NCI).  The summary reflects an independent review of the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Board members review recently published articles each month to determine whether an article should: be discussed at a meeting, be cited with text, or replace or update an existing article that is already cited. Changes to the summaries are made through a consensus process in which Board members evaluate the strength of the evidence in  the published articles and determine how the article should be included in the summary. The lead reviewers for Breast Cancer Treatment During Pregnancy are: Tarek Hijal, MD (McGill University Health Centre) Joseph L. Pater, MD (NCIC-Clinical Trials Group) Carol Tweed, MD (Maryland Oncology Hematology) Any comments or questions about the summary content should be submitted to Cancer.gov through the NCI website's Email Us. Do not contact the individual Board Members with questions or comments about the summaries. Board members will not respond to individual inquiries. Some of the reference citations in this summary are accompanied by a level-of-evidence designation. These designations are intended to help readers assess the strength of the evidence supporting the use of specific interventions or approaches. The PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board uses a formal evidence ranking system in developing its level-of-evidence designations. PDQ is a registered trademark. Although the content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text, it cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless it is presented in its entirety and is regularly updated. However, an author would be permitted to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks succinctly: [include excerpt from the summary].” The preferred citation for this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Adult Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Breast Cancer Treatment During Pregnancy. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/breast/hp/pregnancy-breast-treatment-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389427] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use within the PDQ summaries only. Permission to use images outside the context of PDQ information must be obtained from the owner(s) and cannot be granted by  the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the illustrations in this summary, along with many other cancer-related images, is available in Visuals Online, a collection of over 2,000 scientific images. Based on the strength of the available evidence, treatment options may be described as either “standard” or “under clinical evaluation.” These classifications should not be used as a basis for insurance reimbursement determinations. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s Email Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Alcohol and Cancer Risk Fact Sheet - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/alcohol/alcohol-fact-sheet
txt:  What is alcohol?  What is the evidence that alcohol drinking can cause cancer?  How does alcohol affect the risk of cancer?  How does the combination of alcohol and tobacco affect cancer risk?  Can people's genes affect their risk of alcohol-related cancers?  Can drinking red wine help prevent cancer?  What happens to cancer risk after a person stops drinking alcohol?  Is it safe for someone to drink alcohol while undergoing cancer chemotherapy?  What is alcohol? What is the evidence that alcohol drinking can cause cancer? How does alcohol affect the risk of cancer? How does the combination of alcohol and tobacco affect cancer risk? Can people's genes affect their risk of alcohol-related cancers? Can drinking red wine help prevent cancer? What happens to cancer risk after a person stops drinking alcohol? Is it safe for someone to drink alcohol while undergoing cancer chemotherapy? What is alcohol? Alcohol is the common term for ethanol or ethyl alcohol, a chemical substance found in alcoholic beverages such as beer, hard cider, malt liquor, wines, and distilled spirits (liquor). Alcohol is produced by the fermentation of sugars and starches by yeast. Alcohol is also found in some medicines, mouthwashes, and household products (including vanilla extract and other flavorings). This fact sheet focuses on cancer risks associated with the consumption of alcoholic beverages. According to the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, a standard alcoholic drink in the United States contains 14.0 grams (0.6 ounces) of pure alcohol. Generally, this amount of pure alcohol is found in: 12 ounces of beer  8–10 ounces of malt liquor  5 ounces of wine  1.5 ounces, or a "shot," of 80-proof distilled spirits (liquor)  These amounts are used by public health experts in developing health guidelines about alcohol consumption and to provide a way for people to compare the amounts of alcohol they consume. However, they may not reflect the typical serving sizes people may encounter in daily life. According to the federal government’s Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2020–2025, individuals who do not drink alcohol should not start drinking for any reason. The Dietary Guidelines also recommends that people who drink alcohol do so in moderation by limiting consumption to 2 drinks or less in a day for men and 1 drink or less in a day for women. Heavy alcohol drinking is defined as having 4 or more drinks on any day or 8 or more drinks per week for women and 5 or more drinks on any day or 15 or more drinks per week for men. What is the evidence that alcohol drinking can cause cancer? There is a strong scientific consensus that alcohol drinking can cause several types of cancer (1, 2). In its Report on Carcinogens, the National Toxicology Program of the US Department of Health and Human Services lists consumption of alcoholic beverages as a known human carcinogen. The evidence indicates that the more alcohol a person drinks—particularly the more alcohol a person drinks regularly over time—the higher his or her risk of developing an alcohol-associated cancer. Even those who have no more than one drink per day and binge drinkers (those who consume 4 or more drinks for women and 5 or more drinks for men in one sitting) have a modestly increased risk of some cancers (3–7). Based on data from 2009, an estimated 3.5% of cancer deaths in the United States (about 19,500 deaths) were alcohol related (8). Clear patterns have emerged between alcohol consumption and the development of the following types of cancer: Head and neck cancer: Moderate to heavy alcohol consumption is associated with higher risks of certain head and neck cancers. Moderate drinkers have 1.8-fold higher risks of oral cavity (excluding the lips) and pharynx (throat) cancers and 1.4-fold higher risks of larynx (voice box) cancers than non-drinkers, and heavy drinkers have 5-fold higher risks of oral cavity and pharynx cancers and 2.6-fold higher risks of larynx cancers (4, 9). Moreover, the risks of these cancers are substantially higher among persons who consume this amount of alcohol and also use tobacco (10).  Esophageal cancer: Alcohol consumption at any level is associated with an increased risk of a type of esophageal cancer called esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. The risks, compared with no alcohol consumption, range from 1.3-fold higher for light drinking to nearly 5-fold higher for heavy drinking (4, 9). In addition, people who inherit a deficiency in an enzyme that metabolizes alcohol have been found to have substantially increased risks of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma if they consume alcohol (11).  Liver cancer: Heavy alcohol consumption is associated with approximately 2-fold increased risks of two types of liver cancer (hepatocellular carcinoma and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma) (4, 9, 12, 13).  Breast cancer: Epidemiologic studies have consistently found an increased risk of breast cancer with increasing alcohol intake. Pooled data from 118 individual studies indicates that light drinkers have a slightly increased (1.04-fold higher) risk of breast cancer, compared with nondrinkers. The risk increase is greater in moderate drinkers (1.23-fold higher) and heavy drinkers (1.6-fold higher) (4, 9). An analysis of prospective data for 88,000 women participating in two US cohort studies concluded that for women who have never smoked, light to moderate drinking was associated with a 1.13-fold increased risk of alcohol-related cancers (mostly breast cancer) (5).  Colorectal cancer: Moderate to heavy alcohol consumption is associated with 1.2- to 1.5-fold increased risks of cancers of the colon and rectum compared with no alcohol consumption (4, 9, 14).  Have questions about other risk factors for cancer? Connect with our Cancer Information Service. It's free and confidential. Numerous studies have examined whether there is an association between alcohol consumption and the risk of other cancers. For cancers of the ovary, prostate, stomach, uterus, and bladder, either no association with alcohol use has been found or the evidence for an association is inconsistent. However, evidence is accumulating that alcohol consumption is associated with increased risks of melanoma and of prostate and pancreatic cancers (4, 15). Alcohol consumption has also been associated with decreased risks of kidney cancers (16–18) and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (19, 20) in multiple studies. However, any potential benefits of alcohol consumption for reducing the risks of some cancers are likely outweighed by the harms of alcohol consumption. In fact, a recent study that included data from more than 1,000 alcohol studies and data sources, as well as death and disability records from 195 countries and territories from 1990 to 2016, concluded that the optimal number of drinks to consume per day to minimize the overall risk to health is zero (21). That study did not include data on kidney cancer or non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Alcohol consumption may also be associated with an increased risk of second primary cancers. For example, a meta-analysis of data from 19 studies showed that among patients with cancer of the upper aerodigestive tract (UADT)—which includes the oral cavity, pharynx, larynx, and esophagus—for every 10 grams of alcohol consumed per day before the first UADT cancer diagnosis there was a 1.09-fold higher risk of a second primary UADT cancer (22). It is less clear whether alcohol consumption increases the risk of second primary cancers at other sites, such as the breast (23–25). How does alcohol affect the risk of cancer? Researchers have hypothesized multiple ways that alcohol may increase the risk of cancer, including metabolizing (breaking down) ethanol in alcoholic drinks to acetaldehyde, which is a toxic chemical and a probable human carcinogen; acetaldehyde can damage both DNA (the genetic material that makes up genes) and proteins  generating reactive oxygen species (chemically reactive molecules that contain oxygen), which can damage DNA, proteins, and lipids (fats) in the body through a process called oxidation  impairing the body’s ability to break down and absorb a variety of nutrients that may be associated with cancer risk, including vitamin A; nutrients in the vitamin B complex, such as folate; vitamin C; vitamin D; vitamin E; and carotenoids  increasing blood levels of estrogen, a sex hormone linked to the risk of breast cancer  Alcoholic beverages may also contain a variety of carcinogenic contaminants that are introduced during fermentation and production, such as nitrosamines, asbestos fibers, phenols, and hydrocarbons. The mechanisms by which alcohol consumption may decrease the risks of some cancers are not understood and may be indirect. How does the combination of alcohol and tobacco affect cancer risk? Epidemiologic research shows that people who use both alcohol and tobacco have much greater risks of developing cancers of the oral cavity, pharynx (throat), larynx, and esophagus than people who use either alcohol or tobacco alone. In fact, for oral and pharyngeal cancers, the risks associated with using both alcohol and tobacco are multiplicative; that is, they are greater than would be expected from adding the individual risks associated with alcohol and tobacco together (10, 26). Can people's genes affect their risk of alcohol-related cancers? A person’s risk of alcohol-related cancers is influenced by their genes, specifically the genes that encode enzymes involved in metabolizing (breaking down) alcohol (27). For example, one way the body metabolizes alcohol is through the activity of an enzyme called alcohol dehydrogenase, or ADH, which converts ethanol into the carcinogenic metabolite acetaldehyde, mainly in the liver. Recent evidence suggests that acetaldehyde production also occurs in the oral cavity and may be influenced by factors such as the oral microbiome (28, 29). Many individuals of East Asian descent carry a version of the gene for ADH that codes for a "superactive" form of the enzyme. This superactive ADH enzyme speeds the conversion of alcohol (ethanol) to toxic acetaldehyde. Among people of Japanese descent, those who have this form of ADH have a higher risk of pancreatic cancer than those with the more common form of ADH (30). Another enzyme, called aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2), metabolizes toxic acetaldehyde to nontoxic substances. Some people, particularly those of East Asian descent, carry a variant of the gene for ALDH2 that encodes a defective form of the enzyme. In people who produce the defective enzyme, acetaldehyde builds up when they drink alcohol. The accumulation of acetaldehyde has such unpleasant effects (including facial flushing and heart palpitations) that most people who have inherited the ALDH2 variant are unable to consume large amounts of alcohol and therefore have a low risk of developing alcohol-related cancers. However, some individuals with the defective form of ALDH2 can become tolerant to the unpleasant effects of acetaldehyde and consume large amounts of alcohol. Epidemiologic studies have shown that such individuals have a higher risk of alcohol-related esophageal cancer, as well as of head and neck cancers, than individuals with the fully active enzyme who drink comparable amounts of alcohol (31). These increased risks are seen only among people who carry the ALDH2 variant and drink alcohol—they are not observed in people who carry the variant but do not drink alcohol. Can drinking red wine help prevent cancer? The plant secondary compound resveratrol, found in grapes used to make red wine and some other plants, has been investigated for many possible health effects, including cancer prevention. However, researchers have found no association between moderate consumption of red wine and the risk of developing prostate cancer (32) or colorectal cancer (33). What happens to cancer risk after a person stops drinking alcohol? Most of the studies that have examined whether cancer risk declines after a person stops drinking alcohol have focused on head and neck cancers and on esophageal cancer. In general, these studies have found that stopping alcohol consumption is not associated with immediate reductions in cancer risk. The cancer risks eventually decline, although it may take years for the risks of cancer to return to those of never drinkers. For example, ex-drinkers still had higher risks of oral cavity and pharyngeal cancers than never drinkers even 16 years after they stopped drinking alcohol, although it was lower than before they stopped drinking (34). One study estimated that it would take more than 35 years for the higher risks of laryngeal and pharyngeal cancers associated with alcohol consumption to decrease to the level of never drinkers (35). Is it safe for someone to drink alcohol while undergoing cancer chemotherapy? As with most questions related to a specific individual’s cancer treatment, it is best for patients to check with their health care team about whether it is safe to drink alcohol during or immediately following chemotherapy treatment. The doctors and nurses administering the treatment will be able to give specific advice about whether it is safe to consume alcohol while undergoing specific cancer treatments.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Memory or Concentration Problems and Cancer Treatment - Side Effects - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/memory
txt: If treatment makes it hard to concentrate, talk with your nurse to get tips on how to keep track of important information. Whether you have memory or concentration problems (sometimes described as a mental fog or chemo brain) depends on the type of treatment you receive, your age, and other health-related factors. Cancer treatments such as chemotherapy may cause difficulty with thinking, concentrating, or remembering things. So can some types of radiation therapy to the brain and immunotherapy. These cognitive problems may start during or after cancer treatment. Some people notice very small changes, such as a bit more difficulty remembering things, whereas others have much greater memory or concentration problems. Your doctor will assess your symptoms and advise you about ways to manage or treat these problems. Treating conditions such as poor nutrition, anxiety, depression, fatigue, and insomnia may also help. It’s important for you or a family member to tell your health care team if you have difficulty remembering things, thinking, or concentrating. Here are some steps you can take to manage minor memory or concentration problems: Plan your day. Do things that need the most concentration at the time of day when you feel best. Get extra rest and plenty of sleep at night. If you need to rest during the day, short naps of less than 1 hour are best. Long naps can make it more difficult to sleep at night. Keep a daily routine.  Exercise your body and mind. Exercise can help to decrease stress and help you to feel more alert. Exercise releases endorphins, also known as "feel-good chemicals,"which give people a feeling of well-being. Ask what light physical exercises may be helpful for you. Mind–body practices such as meditation or mental exercises such as puzzles or games also help some people.  Get help to remember things. Write down and keep a list handy of important information. Use a daily planner, recorder, or other electronic device to help you remember important activities. Make a list of important names and phone numbers. Keep it in one place so it’s easy to find.  It’s important for you or a family member to talk with your doctor or nurse about any memory or cognitive changes you may have. Prepare for your visit by making a list of questions to ask. Consider adding these questions to your list: Am I at increased risk of cognitive problems based on the treatment I am receiving?  When might these problems start to occur? How long might they last?  Are there steps I can take to decrease these problems?  What symptoms or other problems should I, or a family member, call you about?  Could I meet with a social worker to get ideas about additional support and resources?  Are there specialists who could assess, treat, or advise me on these problems (such as a neuropsychologist, an occupational therapist, a vocational therapist, and others)? 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Alpelisib - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/alpelisib
txt: This page contains brief information about alpelisib and a collection of links to more information about the use of 
         this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Alpelisib
         is approved to treat:  Breast cancer that is hormone receptor positive and HER2 negative and has a mutation in the PIK3CA gene. It is used with fulvestrant to treat postmenopausal women, and men, whose breast cancer has spread and has gotten worse during or after treatment with hormone therapy.  Alpelisib
         is also being studied in the treatment of other types of
         cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Alpelisib - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Targeted Therapy to Treat Cancer Find Clinical Trials for Alpelisib - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Oral Contraceptives (Birth Control Pills) and Cancer Risk - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/hormones/oral-contraceptives-fact-sheet
txt:  What are oral contraceptives?  What is known about the relationship between oral contraceptive use and cancer?  How could oral contraceptives influence cancer risk?  What are oral contraceptives? What is known about the relationship between oral contraceptive use and cancer? How could oral contraceptives influence cancer risk? What are oral contraceptives? Oral contraceptives (birth control pills) are hormone-containing medications that are taken by mouth to prevent pregnancy. They prevent pregnancy by inhibiting ovulation and also by preventing sperm from penetrating through the cervix. By far the most commonly prescribed type of oral contraceptive in the United States contains synthetic versions of the natural female hormones estrogen and progesterone. This type of birth control pill is often called a combined oral contraceptive. Another type of oral contraceptive, sometimes called the mini pill, contains only progestin, which is a man-made version of progesterone. What is known about the relationship between oral contraceptive use and cancer? Nearly all the research on the link between oral contraceptives and cancer risk comes from observational studies, both large prospective cohort studies and population-based case–control studies. Data from observational studies cannot definitively establish that an exposure—in this case, oral contraceptives—causes (or prevents) cancer. That is because women who take oral contraceptives may differ from those who don’t take them in ways other than their oral contraceptive use, and it is possible that these other differences—rather than oral contraceptive use—are what explains their different cancer risk. Overall, however, these studies have provided consistent evidence that the risks of breast and cervical cancers are increased in women who use oral contraceptives, whereas the risks of endometrial, ovarian, and colorectal cancers are reduced (1–3). Breast cancer: An analysis of data from more than 150,000 women who participated in 54 epidemiologic studies showed that, overall, women who had ever used oral contraceptives had a slight (7%) increase in the risk of breast cancer compared with women who had never used oral contraceptives. Women who were currently using oral contraceptives had a 24% increase in risk that did not increase with the duration of use. Risk declined after use of oral contraceptives stopped, and no risk increase was evident by 10 years after use had stopped (4).
	A 2010 analysis of data from the Nurses’ Health Study, which has been following more than 116,000 female nurses who were 24 to 43 years old when they enrolled in the study in 1989, also found that participants who used oral contraceptives had a slight increase in breast cancer risk (5, 6). However, nearly all of the increased risk was seen among women who took a specific type of oral contraceptive, a “triphasic” pill, in which the dose of hormones is changed in three stages over the course of a woman’s monthly cycle. An elevated risk associated with specific triphasic formulations was also reported in a nested case–control study that used electronic medical records to verify oral contraceptive use (7).
	In 2017, a large prospective Danish study reported breast cancer risks associated with more recent formulations of oral contraceptives (8). Overall, women who were using or had recently stopped using oral combined hormone contraceptives had a modest (about 20%) increase in the risk of breast cancer compared with women who had never used oral contraceptives. The risk increase varied from 0% to 60%, depending on the specific type of oral combined hormone contraceptive. The risk of breast cancer also increased the longer oral contraceptives were used.  Cervical cancer: Women who have used oral contraceptives for 5 or more years have a higher risk of cervical cancer than women who have never used oral contraceptives. The longer a woman uses oral contraceptives, the greater the increase in her risk of cervical cancer. One study found a 10% increased risk for less than 5 years of use, a 60% increased risk with 5–9 years of use, and a doubling of the risk with 10 or more years of use (9). However, the risk of cervical cancer has been found to decline over time after women stop using oral contraceptives (10–12).   Endometrial cancer: Women who have ever used oral contraceptives have a lower risk of endometrial cancer than women who have never used oral contraceptives. Risk is reduced by at least 30%, with a greater risk reduction the longer oral contraceptives were used (13). The protective effect persists for many years after a woman stops using oral contraceptives (12, 14, 15). An analysis of women participating in the prospective NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study found that the risk reduction was especially pronounced in long-time users of oral contraceptives who were smokers, had obesity, or exercised rarely (13).  Ovarian cancer: Women who have ever used oral contraceptives have a 30% to 50% lower risk of ovarian cancer than women who have never used oral contraceptives (16–18). This protection has been found to increase with the length of time oral contraceptives are used (13) and to continue for up to 30 years after a woman stops using oral contraceptives (17). A reduction in ovarian cancer risk with use of oral contraceptives is also seen among women who carry a harmful mutation in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene (19–21).  Colorectal cancer: Oral contraceptive use is associated with 15% to 20% lower risks of colorectal cancer (12, 14, 22, 23).  How could oral contraceptives influence cancer risk? Naturally occurring estrogen and progesterone stimulate the development and growth of some cancers (e.g., cancers that express receptors for these hormones, such as breast cancer). Because birth control pills contain synthetic versions of these female hormones, they could potentially also increase cancer risk. In addition, oral contraceptives might increase the risk of cervical cancer by changing the susceptibility of cervical cells to persistent infection with high-risk HPV types (the cause of virtually all cervical cancers). Researchers have proposed multiple ways that oral contraceptives may lower the risks of some cancers, including suppressing endometrial cell proliferation (endometrial cancer)  reducing the number of ovulations a woman experiences in her lifetime, thereby reducing exposure to naturally occurring female hormones (ovarian cancer)  lowering the levels of bile acids in the blood for women taking oral conjugated estrogens (colorectal cancer) (23) 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NCI's Funding of Cancer Research - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/leadership/director/lowy-social-media-clip4
txt: NCI's Funding of Cancer Research
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: What Is Bladder Cancer? - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/bladder
txt: Bladder cancer occurs when cells in the bladder start to grow without control. The bladder is a hollow, balloon-shaped organ in the lower part of the abdomen that stores urine. The bladder has a muscular wall that allows it to get larger to store urine made by the kidneys and to shrink to squeeze urine out of the body. There are two kidneys, one on each side of the backbone, above the waist. The bladder and kidneys work together to remove toxins and wastes from your body through urine: Tiny tubules in the kidneys filter and clean the blood. These tubules take out waste products and make urine. The urine passes from each kidney through a long tube called a ureter into the bladder. The bladder holds the urine until it passes through a tube called the urethra and leaves the body. Urothelial carcinoma     (also called transitional cell carcinoma) is cancer that begins in the urothelial cells, which line the urethra, bladder, ureters, renal pelvis, and some other organs. Almost all bladder cancers are urothelial carcinomas. Urothelial cells are also called transitional cells because they change shape. These cells are able to stretch when the bladder is full of urine and shrink when it is emptied. Other types of bladder cancer are rare: Squamous cell carcinoma is cancer that begins in squamous cells (thin, flat cells lining the inside of the bladder). This type of cancer may form after long-term irritation or infection with a tropical parasite called schistosomiasis, which is common in Africa and the Middle East but rare in the United States.  When chronic irritation occurs, transitional cells that line the bladder can gradually change to squamous cells. Adenocarcinoma is cancer that begins in glandular cells that are found in the lining of the bladder. Glandular cells in the bladder make mucus and other substances. Small cell carcinoma of the bladder is cancer that begins in neuroendocrine cells (nerve-like cells that release hormones into the blood in response to a signal from the nervous system). There are other ways to describe bladder cancer: Non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer is cancer that has not reached the muscle wall of the bladder. Most bladder cancers are non-muscle-invasive. Muscle-invasive bladder cancer is cancer that has spread through the lining of the bladder and into the muscle wall of the bladder or beyond it. Symptoms Many bladder cancer symptoms are also seen with other less serious conditions. These are the warning signs you shouldn’t ignore. Causes and Risk Factors Using tobacco, especially smoking cigarettes, is a major risk factor for bladder cancer. Learn about tobacco use and other risk factors for bladder cancer and what you can do to lower your risk. Screening Learn about bladder cancer screening tests for people at high risk. Diagnosis Learn about the tests that are used to diagnose and stage bladder cancer. Prognosis and Survival Rates Learn about bladder cancer survival rates and why this statistic doesn't predict exactly what will happen to you. Stages Stage refers to the extent of your cancer, such as how large the tumor is and if it has spread. Learn about bladder cancer stages, an important factor in deciding your treatment plan. Treatment Learn about the different ways bladder cancer can be treated. Coping and Support Coping with bladder cancer and the side effects of treatment can feel overwhelming. Learn about resources to help you cope and gain a sense of control. Childhood Bladder Cancer Childhood bladder cancer is a very rare type of cancer that forms in the tissues of the bladder. Learn about the symptoms of bladder cancer in children, and how it is diagnosed and treated.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Inside a Tumor: What Is Cancer? Video Series - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/multimedia-0
txt: Inside a Tumor: What Is Cancer? Video Series A cancerous tumor is an abnormal mass of tissue that forms when cells grow and divide uncontrollably and spread into the surrounding area. Learn about other cells found within a tumor and some of their effects.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Childhood Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors Treatment - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/soft-tissue-sarcoma/patient/child-gist-treatment-pdq
txt:  General Information About Childhood Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors (GIST)  Stages of GIST  Treatment Option Overview  Treatment of GIST  Treatment of Recurrent GIST  To Learn More About GIST  About This PDQ Summary  Gastrointestinal stromal tumors are a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the wall of the stomach or intestines. GIST may develop as part of a syndrome. Signs and symptoms of GIST include anemia and a lump in the abdomen. Tests that examine the digestive tract are used to help diagnose GIST. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) usually begin in cells in the tissues of the wall of the stomach or intestines.  These cells, called interstitial cells of Cajal, help food move along the digestive tract. Childhood GIST usually occurs in the stomach. It is more common in girls, and typically appears in the teen years. GIST in children is not the same as GIST in adults. Patients should be seen at centers that specialize in the treatment of GIST.EnlargeGastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs)  are most common in the stomach and small intestine but may be found anywhere in or near the gastrointestinal tract. GIST may occur as part of the following syndromes: Carney triad (GIST, lung chondroma, and paraganglioma). Carney-Stratakis syndrome (GIST and paraganglioma). These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by GIST or by other conditions. Check with your child's doctor if your child has any of the following: Anemia (tiredness, dizziness, fast or irregular heartbeat, shortness of breath, or pale skin). A lump in the abdomen. A blockage of the intestine (cramping pain in the abdomen, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, and swelling of the abdomen). The following tests and procedures may be used: Physical exam and health history: An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patient’s health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. Gene testing: A laboratory test in which cells or tissue are analyzed to look for changes in the KIT, PDGFA, and SDH genes. It is important to know whether there are changes in these genes in order to diagnose GIST and plan treatment. MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles.  The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.  This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. PET scan (positron emission tomography scan): A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body.  A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein.  The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body.  Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do.EnlargePositron emission tomography (PET) scan. The child lies on a table that slides through the PET scanner. The head rest and white strap help the child lie still.  A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into the child's vein, and a scanner makes a picture of where the glucose is being used in the body.  Cancer cells show up brighter in the picture because they take up more glucose than normal cells do. X-ray: An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body, such as the abdomen or the area where the tumor formed. Biopsy: The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer.Fine-needle aspiration: The removal of tissue using a thin needle.Endoscopy: A procedure to look at organs and tissues inside the body to check for abnormal areas. An endoscope is inserted through an incision (cut) in the skin or opening in the body, such as the mouth or anus. An endoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a tool to remove tissue or lymph node samples, which are checked under a microscope for signs of disease. The following laboratory test may be done to study the tissue samples:Immunohistochemistry:  A laboratory test that uses antibodies to check for certain antigens (markers) in a sample of a patient’s tissue. The antibodies are usually linked to an enzyme or a fluorescent dye. After the antibodies bind to a specific antigen in the tissue sample, the enzyme or dye is activated, and the antigen can then be seen under a microscope. This type of test looks for the enzyme SDH in a sample of the patient's tissue. When SDH is not present, it is called SDH-deficient GIST. It is important to know whether the cancer is SDH-deficient in order to plan treatment. Fine-needle aspiration: The removal of tissue using a thin needle. Endoscopy: A procedure to look at organs and tissues inside the body to check for abnormal areas. An endoscope is inserted through an incision (cut) in the skin or opening in the body, such as the mouth or anus. An endoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a tool to remove tissue or lymph node samples, which are checked under a microscope for signs of disease. The following laboratory test may be done to study the tissue samples: Immunohistochemistry:  A laboratory test that uses antibodies to check for certain antigens (markers) in a sample of a patient’s tissue. The antibodies are usually linked to an enzyme or a fluorescent dye. After the antibodies bind to a specific antigen in the tissue sample, the enzyme or dye is activated, and the antigen can then be seen under a microscope. This type of test looks for the enzyme SDH in a sample of the patient's tissue. When SDH is not present, it is called SDH-deficient GIST. It is important to know whether the cancer is SDH-deficient in order to plan treatment. After GIST has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread to nearby areas or to other parts of the body. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if GIST has spread to nearby areas or other parts of the body is called staging. GIST may spread to the lymph nodes, liver, and peritoneum. There is no standard staging system for childhood GIST. The results of tests and procedures done to diagnose GIST are used to help make decisions about treatment. Sometimes childhood GIST recurs (comes back) after treatment. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if  GIST spreads to the liver, the cancer cells in the liver are actually GIST cells. The disease is metastatic GIST, not liver cancer. There are different types of treatment for children with GIST. Children with GIST should have their treatment planned by a team of doctors who are experts in treating childhood cancer. Two types of standard treatment are used:SurgeryTargeted therapy New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials.Chemotherapy Treatment for childhood GIST may cause side effects. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Follow-up tests may be needed. Surgery Targeted therapy Chemotherapy Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials.  A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the  standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Because cancer in children is rare, taking part in a clinical trial should be considered.  Some clinical trials are open only to patients  who have not started treatment. Treatment will be overseen by a pediatric oncologist, a doctor who specializes in treating children with cancer. The pediatric oncologist works with other pediatric health professionals who are experts in treating children with cancer and who specialize in certain areas of medicine. This may include the following specialists and others: Pediatrician. Pediatric surgeon. Pathologist. Pediatric nurse specialist. Social worker. Rehabilitation specialist. Psychologist. Child-life specialist. Surgery to remove the cancer is a treatment for SDH-deficient GIST. Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to attack cancer cells. Targeted therapies usually cause less harm to normal cells than chemotherapy or radiation therapy do. Tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy: These drugs block signals needed for tumors to grow. Imatinib and sunitinib are used to treat SDH-deficient GIST and GIST with changes in the KIT or PDGFR gene. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). To learn more about side effects that begin during treatment for cancer, visit Side Effects. Side effects from cancer treatment that begin after treatment and continue for months or years are called late effects. Late effects of cancer treatment may include: Physical problems. Changes in mood, feelings, thinking, learning, or memory. Second cancers (new types of cancer) or other conditions. Some late effects may be treated or controlled. It is important to talk with your child's doctors about the possible late effects caused by some treatments.  See the PDQ summary on Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer for more information. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer  treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first  to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. As your child goes through treatment, they will have follow-up tests or checkups. Some tests that were done to diagnose or stage the cancer may be repeated to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your child's condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview  section. Treatment for children who have newly diagnosed tumors with changes in the KIT or PDGFR gene includes the following: Targeted therapy with a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (imatinib or sunitinib). Treatment for children whose newly diagnosed tumors are SDH-deficient may include the following: Surgery to remove the tumor. More surgery may be needed if intestinal obstruction or bleeding occurs. Targeted therapy with a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (sunitinib). Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview  section. Treatment of recurrent GIST in children may include the following: A clinical trial that checks a sample of the patient's tumor for certain gene changes. The type of targeted therapy that will be given to the patient depends on the type of gene change. A clinical trial of a new chemotherapy drug. For more information from the National Cancer Institute about GIST, see the following: Soft Tissue Sarcoma Home Page MyPART (My Pediatric and Adult Rare Tumor Network) Computed Tomography (CT) Scans and Cancer Targeted Cancer Therapies For more childhood cancer information and other general cancer resources, visit: About Cancer Childhood Cancers CureSearch for Children's Cancer Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer Adolescents and Young Adults with Cancer Children with Cancer: A Guide for Parents Cancer in Children and Adolescents Staging Coping with Cancer Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer For Survivors and Caregivers Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish. PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the treatment of childhood gastrointestinal stromal tumors.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board. A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Childhood Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/soft-tissue-sarcoma/patient/child-gist-treatment-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online. Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Colorectal Cancer Prevention - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/colorectal/patient/colorectal-prevention-pdq
txt:  What is prevention?  General Information About Colorectal Cancer  Colorectal Cancer Prevention  About This PDQ Summary  Cancer prevention is action taken to lower the chance of getting cancer. By preventing cancer,  the number of new cases of cancer in a group or population is lowered. Hopefully, this will lower the number of deaths caused by cancer. To prevent new cancers from starting, scientists look at risk factors and protective factors. Anything that increases your chance of developing cancer is called a cancer risk factor; anything that decreases your chance of developing cancer is called a cancer protective factor. Some risk factors for cancer can be avoided, but many cannot. For
		example, both smoking and inheriting certain genes are risk factors for some
		types of cancer, but only smoking can be avoided. Regular exercise and a healthy diet may be protective factors for some types of cancer. Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors  may lower your  risk, but it does
		not mean that you will not get cancer. Different ways to prevent cancer are being studied, including: Changing lifestyle or eating habits. Avoiding things known to cause cancer. Taking medicines to treat a precancerous condition or to keep cancer from starting. Colorectal cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer)
		  cells form in the tissues of the colon or the rectum. Colorectal cancer is the third leading cause of death from
			 cancer in the United States. The colon is part of the body's digestive system. The digestive system removes and
		  processes nutrients (vitamins, minerals, carbohydrates, fats, proteins, and
		  water) from foods and helps pass waste material out of the body. The digestive
		  system is made up of the mouth, throat, esophagus,
		  stomach, and the
		  small and large intestines. The colon (large bowel) is the first part of the large intestine and is about 5 feet long. Together, the rectum and anal canal make up the last part of the large intestine and are 6 to 8 inches long. The anal canal ends at the
		  anus (the opening of the large intestine to
		  the outside of the body). EnlargeAnatomy of the lower gastrointestinal (digestive) system showing  the colon, rectum, and anus. Other organs that make up the digestive system are also shown. Cancer that begins in the colon is called colon cancer, and cancer
		  that begins in the rectum is called rectal cancer. Cancer that affects either of
		  these organs may also be called colorectal cancer. See the following PDQ summaries for more information about  colorectal  cancer: Colorectal Cancer Screening Colon Cancer Treatment Rectal Cancer Treatment Genetics of Colorectal Cancer Between  2011 and 2019, the number of new colorectal cancer cases in the United States decreased slightly per year in people aged 50 years and older, but increased slightly  per year in people younger than 50 years. For the past 20 years, the rate of deaths from colorectal cancer has been decreasing in both men and women. The number of new cases  and the number of deaths are higher in Black people compared with other races; however, studies have  found no evidence that Black people have higher rates of precancerous lesions. Finding and treating colorectal cancer early may prevent death from colorectal cancer. Screening tests may be used to help find colorectal cancer. Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may
		  help     prevent cancer. The following risk factors increase the risk of colorectal cancer:AgeFamily history of colorectal cancerPersonal historyInherited riskAlcoholCigarette smokingRaceObesity The following protective factors decrease the risk of colorectal cancer:Physical activityAspirinCombination hormone replacement therapy Polyp removal It is not clear if the following affect the risk of colorectal cancer:Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) other than aspirinCalciumDiet The following factors do not affect the risk of colorectal cancer:Hormone replacement therapy with estrogen onlyStatins Cancer prevention  clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. New ways to prevent colorectal cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Age Family history of colorectal cancer Personal history Inherited risk Alcohol Cigarette smoking Race Obesity Physical activity Aspirin Combination hormone replacement therapy Polyp removal Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) other than aspirin Calcium Diet Hormone replacement therapy with estrogen only Statins Avoiding cancer risk factors may help prevent certain cancers. Risk factors include smoking, having overweight, and not getting enough exercise.  Increasing protective factors such as quitting smoking and exercising may also help prevent some cancers. Talk to your doctor or other health care professional about how you might lower your risk of cancer. The  risk of colorectal cancer increases after age 50. Most cases of colorectal cancer are diagnosed after age 50. Having a  parent, brother, sister, or child with colorectal cancer doubles a person's  risk of colorectal cancer. Having a personal history of the following conditions   increases the risk of colorectal cancer: Previous colorectal cancer. High-risk   adenomas (colorectal polyps that are 1 centimeter or larger in size or that have cells that look abnormal under a microscope). Ovarian cancer. Inflammatory bowel disease (such as ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease). The risk of colorectal cancer is increased when certain gene changes linked to familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) or hereditary nonpolyposis colon
			 cancer (HNPCC or Lynch Syndrome) are inherited. Drinking 3 or more  alcoholic beverages  per day increases the risk of 
			 colorectal cancer. Drinking alcohol is also linked to  the risk of forming large colorectal      adenomas (benign tumors). Cigarette smoking is linked to  an increased risk of colorectal cancer and death from colorectal cancer. Smoking cigarettes is also linked  to an increased risk of
			 forming  colorectal adenomas. Cigarette smokers who have had surgery to remove colorectal adenomas are at an increased risk for the adenomas to recur (come back). Black individuals have an increased risk of colorectal cancer and death from colorectal cancer compared to other races. Obesity is linked to an increased risk of colorectal cancer  and death from colorectal cancer. A lifestyle that includes regular physical activity is linked to  a decreased risk of colorectal cancer. Studies have shown that taking aspirin daily for at least two years lowers the risk of colorectal cancer and the risk of death from colorectal cancer. The decrease in risk begins 10 to 20 years after patients start taking aspirin. The possible harms of aspirin use (100 mg or less) daily or every other day include an increased risk of stroke and bleeding in the stomach     and intestines. These risks may be greater among the elderly, men, and those  with conditions linked to  a higher than normal risk of   bleeding. Studies have shown that combination hormone replacement therapy (HRT)  that includes both estrogen and progestin lowers the risk of invasive colorectal cancer in postmenopausal women. However, in women who take combination HRT and do develop colorectal cancer, the cancer is more likely to be advanced when it is diagnosed and the risk of dying from colorectal cancer is not decreased. The possible harms of combination HRT include an increased risk of having: Breast cancer. Heart disease. Blood clots. Most colorectal polyps are adenomas, which may develop into cancer.  Removing colorectal polyps that are larger than 1 centimeter (pea-sized) may lower the risk of colorectal cancer. It is not known if removing smaller polyps lowers the risk of colorectal cancer. The possible harms of polyp removal during colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy include a tear in the wall of the colon and bleeding. It is not known if the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or NSAIDs (such as sulindac, celecoxib, naproxen, and ibuprofen) lowers the risk of colorectal cancer. Studies have shown that taking the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug  celecoxib reduces the  risk of colorectal adenomas (benign tumors)    coming back after they have been removed. It is not clear if this results in a lower risk of colorectal cancer. Taking sulindac or celecoxib has been shown to reduce the number and size of polyps that form in the colon and rectum of people with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). It is not clear if this results in a lower risk of colorectal cancer. The possible harms  of NSAIDs include: Kidney problems. Bleeding in the stomach, intestines, or brain. Heart problems such as heart attack and congestive heart failure. It is not known if taking calcium supplements lowers the risk of colorectal cancer. It is not known if a diet low in fat and meat and high in fiber, fruits, and vegetables lowers the risk of colorectal cancer. Some studies have shown that a diet high in fat, proteins, calories, and meat increases the risk of colorectal cancer, but other studies have not. Hormone replacement therapy with estrogen only does not lower the risk of having invasive colorectal cancer or the risk of dying from colorectal cancer. Studies have shown that taking statins (drugs that lower cholesterol) does not increase or decrease the risk of colorectal cancer. Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to  study ways to lower the risk
			 of developing certain types of cancer. Some cancer prevention trials are
			 conducted with healthy people who have not had cancer but who have an increased risk for cancer. Other prevention trials
			 are conducted with people who have had cancer and are trying to prevent another cancer of the same type or to lower their chance of developing a
			 new type of cancer. Other trials are done with healthy volunteers who are not known to have any risk factors for cancer. The purpose of some cancer prevention clinical trials is to find out
			 whether actions people take can prevent cancer. These may include exercising more or quitting smoking
			 or  taking certain medicines, vitamins, minerals, or food
			 supplements. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish. PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about colorectal cancer prevention.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Screening and Prevention Editorial Board. A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Screening and Prevention Editorial Board. PDQ Colorectal Cancer Prevention. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/colorectal/patient/colorectal-prevention-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389376] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online. Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: CRCHD Native American Heritage Month Video Campaign - Transcripts - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/crchd/nahm-transcripts
txt: Transcripts for each video within the CRCHD National Native American Heritage Month Video Campaign may be found below. My name is Kaylia Baca. I am representing the Zuni Tribe of New Mexico as a previous participant in the R25 YES Program. Participating in the R25 YES Program has affected my view on cancer in multiple impactful ways. First and foremost, participating in the R25 YES Program gave me a much deeper understanding on the causes, treatments, and current research around cancer. Through the R25 YES Program, I got to view what contributes to cancer from multiple different perspectives. From learning about cancer through genetics, lifestyle, and environmental exposures, I got to expand my knowledge on cancer. Through this program, I also got to explore the diverse types of cancer, each with its own biology, prognosis, and treatment options. To say the least, the R25 YES Program has broadened my view of cancer, inspiring me to bring my knowledge back to my home community, to share and inform all of my community members. Hi, I'm Amaya Pablo. I'm a part of the Hopi and Tohono Oʼodham Tribes. I am a junior at Northern Arizona University. I'm a chemistry major with an emphasis in health professionals, with a minor in biology and Indigenous health studies. A pivotal moment in my cancer research career was learning about the prevalence of cancer in Native American communities. Through the Partnership for Native American Cancer Prevention at Northern Arizona University, I've been exposed to many cancer disparities in communities including my own. Many of my family members have suffered from breast cancer and because of this, I have decided to pursue a career in oncology and serve my Native community.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Juanita – Childhood Cancer Survivor - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/childhood/childhood-cancer-data-initiative/stories/juanita
txt: Juanita believes data sharing can lead to a deeper understanding of the late effects of childhood cancer treatment and enhance support for those navigating challenges in their post-cancer lives. Founder, BeholdBeGold Juanita’s (she/her) zest for life is clear in her many passions—salsa dancing, volunteering, traveling, to name a few—and in the energy with which she shares her story. At 10, she was diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. After receiving treatment spanning five years and enduring debilitating complications and a recurrence, Juanita recovered. But her ordeal was not over. “Lifelong health complications have reshaped various aspects of my life, posing ongoing obstacles that require constant adjustment and perseverance,” Juanita said, adding that dental and cognitive problems, including a recent diagnosis of epilepsy, are just a few of those obstacles. Twenty years after her diagnosis, Juanita is driving a movement to raise awareness and share data about the late effects of childhood cancer treatment. “By sharing our experiences and data, we’re not just advocating for ourselves,” Juanita said, “we’re paving the way for a brighter future for all young people facing cancer.”
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: ¿Por qué es importante la investigación del cáncer? - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/media/1165071
txt: La investigación del cáncer es la clave para avanzar contra el cáncer. Hay cuatro tipos de investigación principales: básica, clínica, epidemiológica y aplicable (traslacional). En esta infografía se describen las diferencias entre cada tipo de investigación y la forma en que generan avances.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Building a Diverse Workforce - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/grants-training/training/idwb
txt: The National Cancer Institute (NCI) is committed to increasing the diversity of the cancer research workforce, building a more inclusive and equitable NCI community, addressing cancer disparities, and advancing health equity.  To learn more, visit the NCI Equity and Inclusion Program website. The goals of the Intramural Diversity Workforce Branch (IDWB) within the NCI Center for Cancer Training (CCT) are to: Attract and recruit talented scientists from diverse* backgrounds to increase the diversity of the cancer research workforce  Implement activities and programs to support fellows, foster community, and create a lasting culture of inclusion  Serve as a centralized coordinating center to enhance diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility for training programs across NCI  The Cancer Research Interns (CRI) Summer Program provides a training opportunity for students looking for initial research training.  The Cancer Research Postbac (CRP) Program (formerly known as the Introduction to Cancer Research Careers) provides up to 2 years of post-baccalaureate training to explore opportunities in basic and clinical research, cancer epidemiology and genetics research, cancer control science as well as global health.  The NCI Postdoc Recruitment Event (PRE)  (formerly known as the Graduate Student Recruiting Program) provides doctoral candidates the opportunity to explore postdoctoral opportunities at NCI.  The following programs are available to NCI Fellows: The Diversity Career Development Program (DCDP) provides current NCI postdoctoral fellows with the tools necessary to develop as leaders in academic independent research careers.  The Frederick Diversity Committee (FDC) provides current NCI fellows with opportunities to promote diversity and inclusivity at the Frederick campus.  Black Cancer Researchers (BCR) was established to build community among the three campuses and create a safe informal space for Black scientists within the NCI.  The group helps participants build collaboration (both scientific and professional), provide peer mentoring, and grow their scientific network.  If you're interested in joining, please contact Dr. Dominiqua Griffin.  Additionally, here are some NIH-wide resources that promote inclusion and can help fellows build community: Inclusion, Anti-Racism, and Wellness Resources compiled by NIH Office of Intramural Training & Education (OITE)  If you are looking for a community within the NIH, there are a number of community groups (some Fellow-led) that may help you feel more comfortable within the campus.  *See the latest Guide Notice on NIH's Interest in Diversity for a listing of the groups that are currently considered underrepresented in the biomedical sciences. The Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities (CRCHD) manages NCI's Intramural Continuing Umbrella of Research Experiences (iCURE) program. The iCURE program supports mentored research experiences for qualified students and scientists from diverse backgrounds in the multidisciplinary research environment of the NCI campuses in Bethesda, Rockville, and Frederick, Maryland.  The iCURE provides opportunities to post-baccalaureate (including post-master’s) individuals, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: The Genetics of Cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/genetics
txt:  Is cancer a genetic disease?  Is cancer hereditary?  What is a family cancer syndrome?  Should I get genetic testing for cancer risk?  How can I find out what genetic changes are in my cancer?  Who can see my genetic test results?  How do genetic changes cause cancer?  What kinds of genetic changes cause cancer?  Is cancer a genetic disease? Is cancer hereditary? What is a family cancer syndrome? Should I get genetic testing for cancer risk? How can I find out what genetic changes are in my cancer? Who can see my genetic test results? How do genetic changes cause cancer? What kinds of genetic changes cause cancer? Is cancer a genetic disease? Genetic changes that cause cancer can be inherited or arise from certain environmental exposures. Genetic changes can also happen because of errors that occur as cells divide. Yes, cancer is a genetic disease. It is caused by changes in genes that control the way cells grow and multiply. Cells are the building blocks of your body. Each cell has a copy of your genes, which act like an instruction manual. Genes are sections of DNA that carry instructions to make a protein or several proteins. Scientists have found hundreds of DNA and genetic changes (also called variants, mutations, or alterations) that help cancer form, grow, and spread. Cancer-related genetic changes can occur because: random mistakes in our DNA happen as our cells multiply  our DNA is altered by carcinogens in our environment, such as chemicals in tobacco smoke, UV rays from the sun, and the human papillomavirus (HPV)  they were inherited from one of our parents  DNA changes, whether caused by a random mistake or by a carcinogen, can happen throughout our lives and even in the womb. While most genetic changes aren’t harmful on their own, an accumulation of genetic changes over many years can turn healthy cells into cancerous cells. The vast majority of cancers occur by chance as a result of this process over time. Is cancer hereditary? Determining breast cancer risk: The discovery of BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations improved screening and treatment decisions for breast and ovarian cancers. Cancer itself can’t be passed down from parents to children. And genetic changes in tumor cells can’t be passed down. But a genetic change that increases the risk of cancer can be passed down (inherited) if it is present in a parent's egg or sperm cells. For example, if a parent passes a mutated BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene to their child, the child will have a much higher risk of developing breast and several other cancers. That’s why cancer sometimes appears to run in families. Up to 10% of all cancers may be caused by inherited genetic changes. Inheriting a cancer-related genetic change doesn’t mean you will definitely get cancer. It means that your risk of getting cancer is increased. What is a family cancer syndrome? A family cancer syndrome, also called a hereditary cancer syndrome, is a rare disorder in which family members have a higher-than-average risk of developing a certain type or types of cancer. Family cancer syndromes are caused by inherited genetic variants in certain cancer-related genes. With some family cancer syndromes, people tend to develop cancer at an early age or have other noncancer health conditions. For example, familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a family cancer syndrome caused by certain inherited changes in the APC gene. People with FAP have a very high chance of developing colorectal cancer at an early age and are also at risk of developing other kinds of cancer. But not all cancers that appear to “run in families” are caused by family cancer syndromes. A shared environment or habits, such as exposure to air pollution or tobacco use, may cause the same kind of cancer to develop among family members. Also, multiple family members may develop common cancers, such as prostate cancer, just by chance. Cancer can also run in a family if family members have a combination of many genetic variants that each have a very small cancer risk. Should I get genetic testing for cancer risk? Certain genetic tests can show if you’ve inherited a genetic change that increases your risk of cancer. This testing is usually done with a small sample of blood, but it can sometimes be done with saliva, cells from inside the cheek, or skin cells. Not everyone needs to get genetic testing for cancer risk. Your doctor or health care provider can help you decide if you should get tested for genetic changes that increase cancer risk. They will likely ask if you have certain patterns in your personal or family medical history, such as cancer at an unusually young age or several relatives with the same kind of cancer. If your doctor recommends genetic testing, talking with a genetic counselor can help you consider the potential risks, benefits, and drawbacks of genetic testing in your situation. After testing, a genetic counselor, doctor, or other health care professional trained in genetics can help you understand what the test results mean for you and for your family members. Although it’s possible to order an at-home genetic test on your own, these tests have many drawbacks and are not generally recommended as a way to see whether you have inherited a genetic change that increases cancer risk. For more information on what tests are available and who may want to consider them, see Genetic Testing for Inherited Cancer Susceptibility Syndromes. How can I find out what genetic changes are in my cancer? If you have cancer, a different type of genetic test called a biomarker test can identify genetic changes that may be driving the growth of your cancer. This information can help your doctors decide which therapy might work best for you or if you may be able to enroll in a particular clinical trial. For more information, see Biomarker Testing for Cancer Treatment. Biomarker testing may also be called tumor profiling or molecular profiling. Biomarker testing is different from the genetic testing that is used to find out if you have an inherited genetic change that makes you more likely to get cancer. Biomarker testing is done using a sample of your cancer cells—either a small piece of a tumor or a sample of your blood. In some cases, the results of a biomarker test might suggest that you have an inherited mutation that increases cancer risk. If that happens, you may need to get another genetic test to confirm whether you truly have an inherited mutation that increases cancer risk. Who can see my genetic test results? Your genetic counselor, doctors, and other health care professionals might see your genetic test results. In addition, your health insurance company has legitimate, legal access to your medical records. Legal protections prevent discrimination on the basis of genetic test results, including the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (GINA) and the Privacy Rule of the Health Information Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). How do genetic changes cause cancer? The findings could potentially help doctors detect the cancer earlier. Genetic changes can lead to cancer if they alter the way your cells grow and spread. Most cancer-causing DNA changes occur in genes, which are sections of DNA that carry the instructions to make proteins or specialized RNA such as microRNA. For example, some DNA changes raise the levels of proteins that tell cells to keep growing. Other DNA changes lower the levels of proteins that tell cells when to stop growing. And some DNA changes stop proteins that tell cells to self-destruct when they are damaged. For a healthy cell to turn cancerous, scientists think that more than one DNA change has to occur. People who have inherited a cancer-related genetic change need fewer additional changes to develop cancer. However, they may never develop these changes or get cancer. As cancer cells divide, they acquire more DNA changes over time. Two cancer cells in the same tumor can have different DNA changes. In addition, every person with cancer has a unique combination of DNA changes in their cancer. For more information on the biological changes that make cells cancerous, see What is Cancer? Differences between Cancer Cells and Normal Cells. What kinds of genetic changes cause cancer? Fusion proteins, which can occur when parts of different chromosomal regions are joined, may drive the development of many cancers in children. Multiple kinds of genetic changes can lead to cancer. One genetic change, called a DNA mutation or genetic variant, is a change in the DNA code, like a typo in the sequence of DNA letters. Some variants affect just one DNA letter, called a nucleotide. A nucleotide may be missing, or it may be replaced by another nucleotide. These are called point mutations. For example, around 5% of people with cancer have a point mutation in the KRAS gene that replaces the DNA letter G with A. This single letter change creates an abnormal KRAS protein that constantly tells cells to grow. Cancer-causing genetic changes can also occur when segments of DNA—sometimes very large ones—are rearranged, deleted, or copied. These are called chromosomal rearrangements. For example, most chronic myelogenous leukemias (a type of blood cancer) are caused by a chromosomal rearrangement that places part of the BCR gene next to the ABL gene. This rearrangement creates an abnormal protein, called BCR-ABL, that makes leukemia cells grow out of control. Some cancer-causing DNA changes occur outside genes, in sections of DNA that act like “on” or “off” switches for nearby genes. For example, some brain cancer cells have multiple copies of “on” switches next to genes that drive cell growth. Other DNA changes, known as epigenetic changes, can also cause cancer. Unlike genetic variants, epigenetic changes (sometimes called epimutations) may be reversible and they don’t affect the DNA code. Instead, epigenetic changes affect how DNA is packed into the nucleus. By changing how DNA is packaged, epigenetic changes can alter how much protein a gene makes. Some substances and chemicals in the environment that cause genetic changes can also cause epigenetic changes, such as tobacco smoke, heavy metals like cadmium, and viruses like Epstein-Barr virus.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Intraocular (Eye) Melanoma Treatment (PDQ®) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/eye/hp/intraocular-melanoma-treatment-pdq
txt:  General Information About Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma Treatment  Cellular Classification of Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma  Classification and Stage Information for Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma  Treatment Option Overview  Treatment of Iris Melanoma  Treatment of Ciliary Body Melanoma  Treatment of Small Choroidal Melanoma  Treatment of Medium and Large Choroidal Melanoma  Treatment of Extraocular Extension and Metastatic Intraocular Melanoma  Treatment of Recurrent Intraocular Melanoma  Latest Updates to This Summary (05/12/2023)  About This PDQ Summary  Incidence and Mortality Anatomical Location Diagnosis Prognostic Factors Melanoma of the uveal tract (iris, ciliary body, and choroid), though rare, is the most common primary intraocular malignancy in adults. The mean age-adjusted incidence of uveal melanoma in the United States is approximately 4.3 new cases per million people, with no clear variation by latitude.  Men have a higher incidence at 4.9  cases per million than do women at 3.7 cases per million.[1]  The age-adjusted incidence of this cancer has remained stable since at least the early 1970s.[1,2]  U.S. incidence rates are low compared with the rates of other reporting countries, which vary from about 5.3 to 10.9 cases per million.  Some of the variation may be the result of  differences in inclusion criteria and methods of calculation.[1] Uveal melanoma is diagnosed mostly at older ages, with a progressively rising, age-specific incidence rate that peaks near age 70 years.[3] Host susceptibility factors associated with the development of this cancer include the following:[2-4] Race and ethnicity: White. Light eye color. Fair skin. The ability to tan. In view of these susceptibility factors, numerous observational studies have attempted to explore the relationship between sunlight exposure and risk of uveal melanoma. To date, these studies have found only weak associations or yielded contradictory results.[3] Similarly, there is no consistent evidence that occupational exposure to  UV light or other agents is a risk factor for uveal melanoma.[3,5] Uveal melanomas can arise in the anterior (iris) or the posterior (ciliary body or choroid) uveal tract.[6] Most uveal tract melanomas originate in the choroid. The ciliary body is less commonly a site of origin, and the iris is the least common. The comparatively low incidence of iris melanomas has been attributed to the characteristic features of these tumors; they tend to be small, slow growing, and relatively dormant compared with their posterior counterparts. Iris melanomas rarely metastasize.[7] Melanomas of the posterior uveal tract generally have a more malignant, histological appearance; are detected later; and metastasize more frequently than iris melanomas. The typical choroidal melanoma is a brown, elevated, dome-shaped subretinal mass. The degree of pigmentation ranges from dark brown to totally amelanotic. Most uveal melanomas are initially completely asymptomatic. As the tumor enlarges, it may cause distortion of the pupil (iris melanoma), blurred vision (ciliary body melanoma), or markedly decreased visual acuity caused by  secondary retinal detachment (choroidal melanoma). Serous detachment of the retina may occur. If extensive detachment occurs, secondary angle-closure glaucoma occasionally develops. Clinically, several lesions simulate uveal melanoma, including metastatic carcinoma, posterior scleritis, and benign tumors, such as nevi and hemangiomas.[8]EnlargeAnatomy of the eye. Careful examination by an experienced clinician remains the most important test to diagnose intraocular melanoma. A small uveal melanoma cannot be distinguished from a nevus.  Small uveal lesions are  observed for growth before making a diagnosis of melanoma. Clinical findings that may help to identify melanoma include the following:[6] Orange pigment on the tumor surface. Subretinal fluid. Tumor thickness of more than  2 mm. Low internal reflectivity on ultrasound examination. Ancillary diagnostic testing, including fluorescein angiography and ultrasonography, can be extremely valuable in establishing and confirming the diagnosis.[9] In a large, retrospective, single-center series of 2,514 consecutive patients with choroidal nevi, the progression rate to melanoma at 5 years was 8.6%; at 10 years, the rate was 12.8%; and at 15 years, it was 17.3%.[10] A number of factors influence prognosis. The most important factors include the following: Cell type. For more information, see  the Cellular Classification of Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma  section. Tumor size. Location of the anterior margin of the tumor. Degree of ciliary body involvement. Extraocular extension. Several additional microscopic features can affect the prognosis of intraocular melanoma, including the following: Mitotic activity. Lymphocytic infiltration. Fibrovascular loops (possibly). Cell type is the most commonly used predictor of outcome following enucleation, with spindle-A cell melanomas carrying the best prognosis and epithelioid cell melanomas carrying the least favorable prognosis.[1,4,9] Nevertheless, most tumors have an admixture of cell types, and there is no clear consensus regarding the proportion of epithelioid cells that constitutes designation of a tumor as mixed or epithelioid.[6] Extraocular extension, recurrence, and metastasis are associated with an extremely poor prognosis, and long-term survival cannot be expected.[11] The 5-year mortality rate associated with metastasis from ciliary body or choroidal melanoma is approximately 30%, compared with a rate of 2% to 3% for iris melanomas.[12] Singh AD, Topham A: Incidence of uveal melanoma in the United States: 1973-1997. Ophthalmology 110 (5): 956-61, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Inskip PD, Devesa SS, Fraumeni JF: Trends in the incidence of ocular melanoma in the United States, 1974-1998. Cancer Causes Control 14 (3): 251-7, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Singh AD, Bergman L, Seregard S: Uveal melanoma: epidemiologic aspects. Ophthalmol Clin North Am 18 (1): 75-84, viii, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Weis E, Shah CP, Lajous M, et al.: The association between host susceptibility factors and uveal melanoma: a meta-analysis. Arch Ophthalmol 124 (1): 54-60, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Harris RB, Griffith K, Moon TE: Trends in the incidence of nonmelanoma skin cancers in southeastern Arizona, 1985-1996. J Am Acad Dermatol 45 (4): 528-36, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Uveal melanoma. In: Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al., eds.: AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 8th ed. Springer; 2017, pp 805–17. Yap-Veloso MI, Simmons RB, Simmons RJ: Iris melanomas: diagnosis and management. Int Ophthalmol Clin 37 (4): 87-100, 1997 Fall. [PUBMED Abstract] Eye and ocular adnexa. In: Rosai J: Ackerman’s Surgical Pathology. 8th ed. Mosby, 1996, pp 2449-2508. Albert DM, Kulkarni AD: Intraocular melanoma. In: DeVita VT Jr, Lawrence TS, Rosenberg SA: Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology. 9th ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2011, pp 2090-8. Shields CL, Furuta M, Berman EL, et al.: Choroidal nevus transformation into melanoma: analysis of 2514 consecutive cases. Arch Ophthalmol 127 (8): 981-7, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Gragoudas ES, Egan KM, Seddon JM, et al.: Survival of patients with metastases from uveal melanoma. Ophthalmology 98 (3): 383-9; discussion 390, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Introduction to melanocytic tumors of the uvea. In: Shields JA, Shields CL: Intraocular Tumors: A Text and Atlas. Saunders, 1992, pp 45-59. Primary intraocular melanomas originate from melanocytes in the uveal tract.[1] The following four distinct cellular types are recognized in intraocular melanoma (revised Callender classification):[2] Spindle-A cells (spindle-shaped cells with slender nuclei and lacking visible nucleoli). Spindle-B cells (spindle-shaped cells with larger nuclei and distinct nucleoli). Epithelioid cells (larger polygonal cells with one or more prominent nucleoli). Intermediate cells (similar to but smaller than epithelioid cells). Most primary intraocular melanomas contain variable proportions of epithelioid, spindle-A, and spindle-B cells (mixed-cell melanomas). Pure epithelioid-cell primary melanomas are infrequent (approximately 3% of cases).[1] In the Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study, mixed-cell type melanomas predominated (86% of cases).[3] Klintworth GK, Scroggs MW: The eye and ocular adnexa. In: Sternberg SS, ed.: Diagnostic Surgical Pathology. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999, pp 994-6. Grossniklaus HE, Green WR: Uveal tumors. In: Garner A, Klintworth GK, eds.: Pathobiology of Ocular Disease: A Dynamic Approach. 2nd ed. M. Dekker, 1994, pp 1423-77. Histopathologic characteristics of uveal melanomas in eyes enucleated from the Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study. COMS report no. 6. Am J Ophthalmol 125 (6): 745-66, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Tumor Size Metastatic Disease StagingAmerican Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) stage groupings and definitions of TNMPrognostic features American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) stage groupings and definitions of TNM Prognostic features Uveal melanoma most often assumes a nodular or dome-shaped configuration, but occasionally tumors can be flat or diffuse and involve extensive areas of the uvea with little elevation. Tumor size classifications according to boundary lines used in a Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study (COMS)  are as follows:[1] Small: Range from 1.0 to 3.0 mm in apical height and largest basal diameter of 5.0 to 16.0 mm.[1] Medium: Range from  3.1 to 8.0 mm  in apical height and  a basal diameter of not more than 16.0 mm.[2] Large: Greater than 8.0 mm in apical height or  a basal diameter  more than 16.0 mm, when the apical height is at least 2.0 mm. Although most ocular melanomas have a raised configuration, about 5% grow in a diffuse pattern that also may have prognostic significance. The tumors have a horizontal, flat-growth pattern, with the thickness measuring approximately 20% or less than the greatest basal dimension. This uncommon variant of uveal melanoma  seems to have a poorer prognosis,  particularly when the diameter is large and the margins are poorly defined.[3] In clinical practice, the tumor base may be estimated in average optic disc diameters (1 dd = 1.5 mm). The average elevation may be estimated in diopters (3 diopters = 1 mm). Other techniques, such as ultrasonography, should be used to provide more accurate measurements. An important function of ophthalmic ultrasonography is the detection of extrascleral extension.[4,5] Extrascleral extension measuring 2 mm or more in thickness can be demonstrated, provided it is located behind the equator where the intraocular tumor, sclera, and adjacent orbital fat are readily imaged.[6] Orbital extraocular extension of choroidal melanoma may be found in eyes with medium and large tumors, but it is very rare in eyes with small melanomas. Systemic metastases are evident in only 2% to 3% of patients at the time of diagnosis of the primary ocular melanoma.[7] Because the uveal tract is a vascular structure without lymphatic channels, tumor spread occurs principally by local extension and by dissemination through the bloodstream.[7]  Lymphatic spread is rare but may occur after local extension into the conjunctiva and its lymphatics.[8] Given the rarity of nodal metastases, sentinel node biopsies of nonclinically involved nodes are not done as part of the staging procedure.[7] Systemic metastases are generally hematogenous in origin, and the first site identified is usually the liver.[9] Lung, bone, and subcutaneous sites are also common.[9] In the COMS trials, the liver was the only site of detectable metastasis in 46% of patients with metastases reported during follow-up or at the time of death; 43% had metastases diagnosed in the liver and other sites.[9] In patients with a history of ocular melanoma who present with hepatic metastases of unknown origin, metastatic melanoma is considered in the differential diagnosis. It is particularly unusual for choroidal melanomas of any size to invade the optic nerve or its meninges.[10] Metastasis of choroidal melanoma to the contralateral choroid is also rare.[9,11] The  AJCC has designated staging by TNM (tumor, node, metastasis) classification to define  melanoma of the uveal tract.[7] As in the seventh  edition of the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, there is no staging system for iris melanomas in the eighth edition. However, TNM should still be recorded for this site and histology combination. There are a number of key prognostic features that are important to collect in malignant melanoma of the uvea, even though they are not included in staging algorithms. These include the following:[7] Chromosomal alterations.Chromosome 3 status (loss or no loss, complete or partial).Chromosome 6p status (gain or no gain).Chromosome 8q status (gain or no gain).Indicate:Technique used for assessing chromosome status may include the following:Karyotyping.Fluorescence in situ hybridization.Comparative genomic hybridization.Loss of heterozygosity using DNA polymorphism analysis (e.g., single nucleotide polymorphism, microsatellite).Other.How specimen  was obtained may include the following:Enucleation.Local resection.Biopsy.Fine-needle aspiration biopsy.For needle biopsies, whether cytopathological evaluation was performed to confirm the presence of tumor cells. Gene-expression profile: class 1 or class 2.Indicate:Technique used for gene-expression profiling (e.g., microarray, pathological complete response).How specimen was obtained (e.g., enucleation, local resection, biopsy, fine-needle aspiration biopsy).For needle biopsies, whether cytopathological evaluation was performed to confirm the presence of tumor cells. Chromosome 3 status (loss or no loss, complete or partial). Chromosome 6p status (gain or no gain). Chromosome 8q status (gain or no gain).Indicate:Technique used for assessing chromosome status may include the following:Karyotyping.Fluorescence in situ hybridization.Comparative genomic hybridization.Loss of heterozygosity using DNA polymorphism analysis (e.g., single nucleotide polymorphism, microsatellite).Other.How specimen  was obtained may include the following:Enucleation.Local resection.Biopsy.Fine-needle aspiration biopsy.For needle biopsies, whether cytopathological evaluation was performed to confirm the presence of tumor cells. Indicate: Technique used for assessing chromosome status may include the following:Karyotyping.Fluorescence in situ hybridization.Comparative genomic hybridization.Loss of heterozygosity using DNA polymorphism analysis (e.g., single nucleotide polymorphism, microsatellite).Other. How specimen  was obtained may include the following:Enucleation.Local resection.Biopsy.Fine-needle aspiration biopsy. For needle biopsies, whether cytopathological evaluation was performed to confirm the presence of tumor cells. Karyotyping. Fluorescence in situ hybridization. Comparative genomic hybridization. Loss of heterozygosity using DNA polymorphism analysis (e.g., single nucleotide polymorphism, microsatellite). Other. Enucleation. Local resection. Biopsy. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy. Indicate: Technique used for gene-expression profiling (e.g., microarray, pathological complete response). How specimen was obtained (e.g., enucleation, local resection, biopsy, fine-needle aspiration biopsy). For needle biopsies, whether cytopathological evaluation was performed to confirm the presence of tumor cells. Clinical.Positron-emission tomography/computed tomography.Fluorine F 18-fludeoxyglucose standardized uptake values (higher values in primary tumor may be associated with shorter survival).Confocal indocyanine green angiography.Identification of complex monocirculatory patterns (i.e., loops, networks, arcs with branching, parallel with cross-linking or a combination of these patterns may be associated with shorter survival). Histopathological.Mitotic count.Number of mitotic figures per 40 high-power fields (typical field area 0.15–0.19 mm2, higher counts are associated with shorter survival).Mean diameter of the ten largest nucleoli.Mean of the longest nucleoli (MLN) is measured along a central 5-mm long strip, e.g., after silver staining (larger values are associated with shorter survival).Presence of extravascular matrix patterns.Loops.Absent.Present (shorter survival).Loops forming networks.Absent.Present (shorter survival).Other complex patterns (arcs with branching, parallel with cross-linking; absent or present).  The patterns are assessed with light microscopy under a dark green filter after staining with periodic-acid Schiff without counterstain.Microvascular density.Number of immunopositive elements labeled with markers for vascular endothelial cells (e.g., CD34 epitope, factor VIII-related antigen) in areas of densest vascularization (typical field area 0.31 mm2, higher counts are associated with shorter survival).Insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1-R).Percentage of immunopositive tumor cells (high expression is associated with shorter survival).Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes.Few (longest survival).Moderate numbers.Many (shortest survival).Tumor-infiltrating macrophages.Few (longest survival).Moderate numbers.Many (shortest survival).The number can be compared with standard photographs.[12]HLA class I expression.Percentage of immunopositive tumor cells (low expression is associated with longer survival). Positron-emission tomography/computed tomography.Fluorine F 18-fludeoxyglucose standardized uptake values (higher values in primary tumor may be associated with shorter survival). Confocal indocyanine green angiography.Identification of complex monocirculatory patterns (i.e., loops, networks, arcs with branching, parallel with cross-linking or a combination of these patterns may be associated with shorter survival). Fluorine F 18-fludeoxyglucose standardized uptake values (higher values in primary tumor may be associated with shorter survival). Identification of complex monocirculatory patterns (i.e., loops, networks, arcs with branching, parallel with cross-linking or a combination of these patterns may be associated with shorter survival). Mitotic count.Number of mitotic figures per 40 high-power fields (typical field area 0.15–0.19 mm2, higher counts are associated with shorter survival). Mean diameter of the ten largest nucleoli.Mean of the longest nucleoli (MLN) is measured along a central 5-mm long strip, e.g., after silver staining (larger values are associated with shorter survival). Presence of extravascular matrix patterns.Loops.Absent.Present (shorter survival).Loops forming networks.Absent.Present (shorter survival).Other complex patterns (arcs with branching, parallel with cross-linking; absent or present).  The patterns are assessed with light microscopy under a dark green filter after staining with periodic-acid Schiff without counterstain. Microvascular density.Number of immunopositive elements labeled with markers for vascular endothelial cells (e.g., CD34 epitope, factor VIII-related antigen) in areas of densest vascularization (typical field area 0.31 mm2, higher counts are associated with shorter survival). Insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1-R).Percentage of immunopositive tumor cells (high expression is associated with shorter survival). Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes.Few (longest survival).Moderate numbers.Many (shortest survival). Tumor-infiltrating macrophages.Few (longest survival).Moderate numbers.Many (shortest survival).The number can be compared with standard photographs.[12] HLA class I expression.Percentage of immunopositive tumor cells (low expression is associated with longer survival). Number of mitotic figures per 40 high-power fields (typical field area 0.15–0.19 mm2, higher counts are associated with shorter survival). Mean of the longest nucleoli (MLN) is measured along a central 5-mm long strip, e.g., after silver staining (larger values are associated with shorter survival). Loops.Absent.Present (shorter survival). Loops forming networks.Absent.Present (shorter survival). Other complex patterns (arcs with branching, parallel with cross-linking; absent or present).  The patterns are assessed with light microscopy under a dark green filter after staining with periodic-acid Schiff without counterstain. Absent. Present (shorter survival). Absent. Present (shorter survival). The patterns are assessed with light microscopy under a dark green filter after staining with periodic-acid Schiff without counterstain. Number of immunopositive elements labeled with markers for vascular endothelial cells (e.g., CD34 epitope, factor VIII-related antigen) in areas of densest vascularization (typical field area 0.31 mm2, higher counts are associated with shorter survival). Percentage of immunopositive tumor cells (high expression is associated with shorter survival). Few (longest survival). Moderate numbers. Many (shortest survival). Few (longest survival). Moderate numbers. Many (shortest survival).The number can be compared with standard photographs.[12] The number can be compared with standard photographs.[12] Percentage of immunopositive tumor cells (low expression is associated with longer survival). Factors predictive of growth and treatment of small choroidal melanoma: COMS Report No. 5. The Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study Group. Arch Ophthalmol 115 (12): 1537-44, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Diener-West M, Earle JD, Fine SL, et al.: The COMS randomized trial of iodine 125 brachytherapy for choroidal melanoma, II: characteristics of patients enrolled and not enrolled. COMS Report No. 17. Arch Ophthalmol 119 (7): 951-65, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Shields CL, Shields JA, De Potter P, et al.: Diffuse choroidal melanoma. Clinical features predictive of metastasis. Arch Ophthalmol 114 (8): 956-63, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Scott IU, Murray TG, Hughes JR: Evaluation of imaging techniques for detection of extraocular extension of choroidal melanoma. Arch Ophthalmol 116 (7): 897-9, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Romero JM, Finger PT, Iezzi R, et al.: Three-dimensional ultrasonography of choroidal melanoma: extrascleral extension. Am J Ophthalmol 126 (6): 842-4, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Echography (ultrasound) procedures for the Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study (COMS), Report no. 12, Part I. J Ophthalmic Nurs Technol 18 (4): 143-9, 1999 Jul-Aug. [PUBMED Abstract] Uveal melanoma. In: Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al., eds.: AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 8th ed. Springer; 2017, pp 805–17. Dithmar S, Diaz CE, Grossniklaus HE: Intraocular melanoma spread to regional lymph nodes: report of two cases. Retina 20 (1): 76-9, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Diener-West M, Reynolds SM, Agugliaro DJ, et al.: Development of metastatic disease after enrollment in the COMS trials for treatment of choroidal melanoma: Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study Group Report No. 26. Arch Ophthalmol 123 (12): 1639-43, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Shields CL, Santos MC, Shields JA, et al.: Extraocular extension of unrecognized choroidal melanoma simulating a primary optic nerve tumor: report of two cases. Ophthalmology 106 (7): 1349-52, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Singh AD, Shields JA, Shields CL, et al.: Choroidal melanoma metastatic to the contralateral choroid. Am J Ophthalmol 132 (6): 941-3, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Mäkitie T, Summanen P, Tarkkanen A, et al.: Tumor-infiltrating macrophages (CD68(+) cells) and prognosis in malignant uveal melanoma. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 42 (7): 1414-21, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Role of Observation Role of SurgeryEnucleationPre-enucleation external-beam radiation therapy (EBRT)Transscleral local resectionSurgical resection of metastases Role of Radiation Therapy Role of Transpupillary Thermotherapy Enucleation Pre-enucleation external-beam radiation therapy (EBRT) Transscleral local resection Surgical resection of metastases Iris melanomas have relatively good outcomes, with a 5-year survival rate of more than 95%. They are predominantly of the spindle-cell type and are usually smaller in size than posterior melanomas because they are detected earlier. Conservative management is generally advocated whenever possible, but surgical intervention may be justified with unequivocal tumor growth or with extensive disease at initial examination. The management of small choroidal melanomas is controversial, and it is not clear whether treatment of small tumors prevents metastasis.[1]   The natural history of small choroidal melanomas is poorly understood. Small, pigmented, choroidal lesions cannot always be differentiated reliably on examination. Growth is a presumed indicator of malignant potential.[2]  The likelihood of progression from the time of diagnosis to the time when tumor growth warrants treatment has not been well characterized. Some ophthalmologists advocate observation. This course has been justified on several grounds, including the difficulty of establishing a correct diagnosis, the lack of any documented efficacy for globe-conserving treatments, and concerns for severe treatment-related morbidity. Others have advocated earlier therapeutic intervention.[1,3,4] Although patients diagnosed with small choroidal tumors were not eligible for participation in the Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study (COMS), these patients were offered participation in a prospective follow-up study to evaluate the natural history of small lesions. Two-year tumor growth estimates of 21% and 5-year tumor growth estimates of  31% were reported.[5] Clinical risk factors associated with tumor growth included the following:[3,5] Increased tumor thickness. Presence of subretinal fluid. Orange pigmentation. Absence of drusen. Absence of retinal pigment. Margin at the optic disc. Epithelial changes surrounding the tumor. The selection of treatment depends on the following: Site of origin (choroid, ciliary body, or iris). Size and location of the lesion. Age of the patient. Occurrence of  extraocular invasion, recurrence, or metastasis. In the past, enucleation (eye removal) was the standard treatment for primary choroidal melanoma, and it is still used when  large tumors are present.  However, enucleation has been largely replaced by radiation therapy (i.e., brachytherapy with radioactive plaques or   external-beam, charged-particle radiation therapy) to spare the affected eye.[6,7] In the case of large, choroidal tumors judged to require enucleation, the role of pre-enucleation EBRT  was tested in a randomized trial and had no impact on overall survival (OS).[8,9][Level of evidence A1]  In a COMS trial, 1,003 patients with large choroidal melanomas (≥2 mm in  height and ≥16 mm in diameter, or ≥10 mm in height irrespective of diameter, or ≥8 mm in height and border <2 mm from the optic disc) with no known metastases were randomly assigned to receive enucleation alone or after preoperative external photon-beam radiation from cobalt 60 or accelerators (20 Gy in 5 daily fractions) to the orbit and globe.[8,9]  Through 10 years of follow-up, the median survival in both arms was approximately 7 years, and the 10-year all-cause mortality was 61% in both arms (relative risk [RR]death, 1.00; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.85–1.18).  Metastasis-free survival was also virtually identical in both arms. Eye-sparing transscleral local resection plays a limited role in the management of uveal melanoma. It is used in patients with large choroidal and ciliary body tumors who are not candidates for radiation therapy but are highly motivated to retain their eye.[10-12]  The procedure is technically demanding and is generally performed only in centers with specialized expertise in this surgery.  There is a substantial risk of retinal detachment, intraocular bleeding, and complications associated with the anesthesia-induced hypotension used to decrease the risk of bleeding.  Either adjuvant brachytherapy or neoadjuvant proton-beam therapy are administered.  Experience is limited to retrospective, single-center, case series.[10-12][Level of evidence C3] Surgical resection of metastases from ocular melanoma has been reported in case series of highly selected patients with occasional favorable outcomes.[13,14]  However, the favorable outcomes may be the result of  strong patient-selection factors, and the role of resection in this setting is unclear.[13,14][Level of evidence C3] Episcleral brachytherapy using plaques containing small radioactive seeds is the most common form of radiation used in the management of intraocular melanoma.  Iodine I 125 (125I), cobalt Co 60 (60Co), palladium Pd 103 (103Pd), iridium Ir 192 (192Ir), and ruthenium Ru 106 (106Ru) are examples of radioactive isotopes used in the brachytherapy plaques.  Isotopes with relatively low photon and electron emissions (125I, 103Pd, and 106Ru) are more easily shielded to reduce the exposure to adjacent normal tissues, and 125I is probably the most commonly used radioisotope.[15]  Although plaque radiation therapy allows preservation of the eye, visual acuity is frequently lost over time. In a case series of 1,106 patients who were treated with plaque radiation therapy for uveal melanoma and who had an initial acuity of at least 20/100, 68% developed poor acuity (i.e., 20/200 or worse) within 10 years.[16] Factors associated with worse acuity outcomes included the following:[16] Age older than 60 years. Diminished baseline acuity. Diabetes. Increased tumor size and thickness. Location near the fovea or optic disc. Isotope (106Ru, 60Co, or 192Ir vs. 125I). 125I brachytherapy yields equivalent overall and melanoma metastasis-specific survival rates to enucleation for medium-sized melanomas.[17][Level of evidence A1]  The randomized COMS Medium Tumor Trial compared 125I episcleral-plaque brachytherapy (85 Gy at 0.42–1.06 Gy/hr) with enucleation in 1,317 patients with medium-sized choroidal tumors (tumor height 2.5–10.0 mm and tumor diameter ≤16.0 mm that were not contiguous with the optic disc).[17] Eighty-five percent of the patients treated with 125I brachytherapy retained their eye for 5 years or more, and 37% of them had visual acuity better than 20/200 in the irradiated eye 5 years after treatment.[17] No statistically significant differences in mortality were observed between the two study arms after 12 years of follow-up, either for death from all causes or death with histopathologically confirmed melanoma metastasis.[18]  Five- and 10-year all-cause mortality rates were 19% and 35% in both study arms; cumulative all-cause mortality at 12 years was 43% in the 125I arm versus 41% in the enucleation arm (RR, 1.04; 95% CI, 0.86–1.24).  Five-year metastasis-specific mortality rates were 13% in both arms; at 10 years, the rates were 21% and 22% (RR for metastasis-specific mortality, 1.07; 95% CI, 0.81–1.41 through 12 years). In a companion study within the COMS, 209 patients were prospectively assessed for quality of life during the first 5 years of follow-up.[19]  Both study groups reported increasing difficulty with vision-oriented daily activities and ocular pain as time elapsed.  Most measures of visual function were similar between the two groups, but there were statistically significant differences favoring the brachytherapy group in comfort with driving for the first year after therapy and in reported peripheral vision for the first 2 years after therapy.  These differences disappeared by year 5 of follow-up.[19][Level of evidence A3] Charged-particle EBRT (using protons, carbon ions, or helium ions) is the other major form of radiation therapy used in the management of ocular melanomas.[20-23]  This form of radiation therapy  requires sophisticated equipment available only at selected centers, and charged-particle EBRT involves patient cooperation during treatment (e.g., voluntarily fixating the eye on a particular point so the tumor is positioned properly in the radiation beam).   A lower risk of early and late local radiation failures has been reported after charged-particle EBRT than after the use of brachytherapy, possibly resulting from differences in dose distribution in the two techniques.[20][Levels of evidence B3 and C3] In a single-center, single-surgeon study, 184 patients with uveal melanomas smaller than 15 mm in diameter and smaller than 10 mm in thickness were randomly assigned to receive 125I brachytherapy versus helium ion radiation (to an estimated dose of 70 Gy equivalents in 5 fractions over 7 to 11 days in each arm).[24]  The local tumor regrowth rate by 4 years was 13.3% in the brachytherapy arm compared with 0% in the helium ion arm (P < .001).  However, the rates of metastasis, death from metastasis, and overall mortality were similar in both arms.[24][Level of evidence B3] Because of its dose distribution, charged-particle irradiation can be better used than plaque brachytherapy to treat larger tumors and tumors closer to the fovea or optic disc.  A large, single-center, single-surgeon series of 2,069 patients treated with proton-beam therapy had an actuarial local control rate of 95% (95% CI, 93%–96%) at 15 years.  The cumulative rate of enucleation was 16% (95% CI, 13%–20%), and  most frequently the result of neovascular glaucoma representing 46% of enucleations, blind uncomfortable eyes or 31% of enucleations, or local recurrence in 23% of enucleations.  As with plaque radiation, risk factors for deterioration in visual acuity after charged-particle radiation were tumor size, location near the fovea or optic disc, baseline acuity, and underlying diabetes.[21] Similarly, another large, single-center, single-surgeon, consecutive series of 886 patients treated with proton-beam irradiation reported a local control rate of 92.1% (95% CI, 89.8%–94.6%) and ocular conservation rate of 87.3% (95% CI, 83.9%–90.9%) at 10 years.[22][Level of evidence C3]  The actuarial OS rate at 10 years was 64.1% (95% CI, 59.5%–69.0%). In a single-center, phase I/II study of 57 evaluable patients treated with carbon ion-beam irradiation and followed for a median of 26 months, 26 patients developed neovascular glaucoma or severe eye pain from increased intraocular pressure, and 3 patients had enucleation. One patient had a local tumor recurrence.[23] In an attempt to lower the complication rate and improve functional outcome, a decreased dose of 50 cobalt Gy equivalents (CGE) has been compared with 70 CGE proton beam (each delivered in 5 fractions, usually within a 7-day period).  Patients (n = 188) with tumors smaller than 15 mm in diameter and smaller than 5 mm in height, which  were located near the optic disc or macula, were randomly assigned to the two doses in a double-masked study design. At 5 years, there were no statistically significant differences in local tumor control, rate of metastasis, visual acuity, or complication rates.  However, the visual fields were better in the 50-CGE group.[25][Level of evidence B3] As noted above in the Role of Surgery section, the role of pre-enucleation external photon-beam radiation therapy has been tested in a randomized trial and has shown no impact on OS for large choroidal tumors treated with enucleation.[8,9] External-beam–photon-beam (gamma-ray) radiation therapy with gamma-knife stereotactic radiation surgery as a single-fraction [26] or fractionated stereotactic radiation [27,28] is being investigated as an alternative to brachytherapy or charged-beam radiation for posterior uveal melanomas, particularly for tumors too large or too close to the optic disc or macula to treat with brachytherapy.  Because the dose rate of radiation  has a slower delivery time than is the case with charged particles, specialized techniques are used to immobilize the eye [26] or to avoid delivery of the photons while the eye is moving or closed.[28]   Experience is more limited with external-beam–photon therapy than for either brachytherapy or charged-particle EBRT, and there are no controlled comparisons with either of the other techniques.  Early results from single-center series suggest similar levels of local tumor control and eye retention rates, but patient-selection factors may play a role.[28][Level of evidence C3] Transpupillary thermotherapy (TTT) directs an infrared laser, usually at a wavelength of  810 nm, through a dilated pupil in one or more sessions to induce heat necrosis of uveal melanomas.  This method carries the theoretical advantage of high-precision destruction of tumor tissue under direct visualization.  However, TTT has important limitations that confine its use to specific circumstances.[1,29]   The limited ability of TTT to penetrate thick tumors with sufficient energy restricts its use to small melanomas or tumors of a size that some ophthalmologists recommend for follow-up without any initial therapy.  For more information, see the Role of Observation section.  When used as the primary therapy, there are relatively high rates of local recurrence and retinal vascular damage.  Recurrence rates are particularly high when the tumor abuts the optic nerve and overhangs the optic disc.[1][Level of evidence C3] In a single-center study, 95 patients with small choroidal melanomas (diameter <10 mm and thickness <3.5 mm) were randomly assigned to TTT versus 125I brachytherapy (100 Gy).[30] The tumor regression rate was 92% in the TTT arm and 98% in the 125I arm (P = .4).  With a mean follow-up time of 56.2 months, there were four recurrences in the TTT arm and one in the 125I arm. However, the study was too small to provide clear information on efficacy differences. TTT is also under evaluation as an adjunct to primary therapy with proton-beam radiation.  In the setting of large uveal melanomas, proton-beam therapy is associated with exudative, inflammatory, and glaucomatous complications that may require enucleation.  In a single-center trial, 151 patients with uveal melanomas at least 7 mm thick or at least 15 mm in diameter were randomly assigned to receive proton-beam radiation (60 CGEs over four daily fractions) with or without TTT (810 nm wavelength at 1, 6, and 12 months after therapy) and followed for a median of 38 months.[31]  There were no differences between the two groups in maculopathy, papillopathy, or glaucoma.  The enucleation rate was lower in the TTT group (about 2% vs. 18% at 5 years, P = .02).  However, the study was not masked, and replication would be important. There are uncertainties  at all stages about the optimal management of intraocular melanoma.  Physicians should discuss clinical trial opportunities with eligible patients.  Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Shields CL, Shields JA, Perez N, et al.: Primary transpupillary thermotherapy for small choroidal melanoma in 256 consecutive cases: outcomes and limitations. Ophthalmology 109 (2): 225-34, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Augsburger JJ: Is observation really appropriate for small choroidal melanomas. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc 91: 147-68; discussion 169-75, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Shields CL, Cater J, Shields JA, et al.: Combination of clinical factors predictive of growth of small choroidal melanocytic tumors. Arch Ophthalmol 118 (3): 360-4, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Robertson DM, Buettner H, Bennett SR: Transpupillary thermotherapy as primary treatment for small choroidal melanomas. Arch Ophthalmol 117 (11): 1512-9, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Factors predictive of growth and treatment of small choroidal melanoma: COMS Report No. 5. The Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study Group. Arch Ophthalmol 115 (12): 1537-44, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Zimmerman LE, McLean IW, Foster WD: Statistical analysis of follow-up data concerning uveal melanomas, and the influence of enucleation. Ophthalmology 87 (6): 557-64, 1980. [PUBMED Abstract] De Potter P, Shields CL, Shields JA: New treatment modalities for uveal melanoma. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 7 (3): 27-32, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] The Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study (COMS) randomized trial of pre-enucleation radiation of large choroidal melanoma II: initial mortality findings. COMS report no. 10. Am J Ophthalmol 125 (6): 779-96, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Hawkins BS; Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study Group: The Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study (COMS) randomized trial of pre-enucleation radiation of large choroidal melanoma: IV. Ten-year mortality findings and prognostic factors. COMS report number 24. Am J Ophthalmol 138 (6): 936-51, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Damato B: The role of eyewall resection in uveal melanoma management. Int Ophthalmol Clin 46 (1): 81-93, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Bechrakis NE, Bornfeld N, Zöller I, et al.: Iodine 125 plaque brachytherapy versus transscleral tumor resection in the treatment of large uveal melanomas. Ophthalmology 109 (10): 1855-61, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Bechrakis NE, Petousis V, Willerding G, et al.: Ten-year results of transscleral resection of large uveal melanomas: local tumour control and metastatic rate. Br J Ophthalmol 94 (4): 460-6, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Hsueh EC, Essner R, Foshag LJ, et al.: Prolonged survival after complete resection of metastases from intraocular melanoma. Cancer 100 (1): 122-9, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Pawlik TM, Zorzi D, Abdalla EK, et al.: Hepatic resection for metastatic melanoma: distinct patterns of recurrence and prognosis for ocular versus cutaneous disease. Ann Surg Oncol 13 (5): 712-20, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Albert DM, Kulkarni AD: Intraocular melanoma. In: DeVita VT Jr, Lawrence TS, Rosenberg SA: Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology. 9th ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2011, pp 2090-8. Shields CL, Shields JA, Cater J, et al.: Plaque radiotherapy for uveal melanoma: long-term visual outcome in 1106 consecutive patients. Arch Ophthalmol 118 (9): 1219-28, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Diener-West M, Earle JD, Fine SL, et al.: The COMS randomized trial of iodine 125 brachytherapy for choroidal melanoma, III: initial mortality findings. COMS Report No. 18. Arch Ophthalmol 119 (7): 969-82, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study Group: The COMS randomized trial of iodine 125 brachytherapy for choroidal melanoma: V. Twelve-year mortality rates and prognostic factors: COMS report No. 28. Arch Ophthalmol 124 (12): 1684-93, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Melia M, Moy CS, Reynolds SM, et al.: Quality of life after iodine 125 brachytherapy vs enucleation for choroidal melanoma: 5-year results from the Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study: COMS QOLS Report No. 3. Arch Ophthalmol 124 (2): 226-38, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Char DH, Kroll S, Phillips TL, et al.: Late radiation failures after iodine 125 brachytherapy for uveal melanoma compared with charged-particle (proton or helium ion) therapy. Ophthalmology 109 (10): 1850-4, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Gragoudas E, Li W, Goitein M, et al.: Evidence-based estimates of outcome in patients irradiated for intraocular melanoma. Arch Ophthalmol 120 (12): 1665-71, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Caujolle JP, Mammar H, Chamorey E, et al.: Proton beam radiotherapy for uveal melanomas at nice teaching hospital: 16 years' experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 78 (1): 98-103, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Tsuji H, Ishikawa H, Yanagi T, et al.: Carbon-ion radiotherapy for locally advanced or unfavorably located choroidal melanoma: a Phase I/II dose-escalation study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 67 (3): 857-62, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Char DH, Quivey JM, Castro JR, et al.: Helium ions versus iodine 125 brachytherapy in the management of uveal melanoma. A prospective, randomized, dynamically balanced trial. Ophthalmology 100 (10): 1547-54, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Gragoudas ES, Lane AM, Regan S, et al.: A randomized controlled trial of varying radiation doses in the treatment of choroidal melanoma. Arch Ophthalmol 118 (6): 773-8, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Modorati G, Miserocchi E, Galli L, et al.: Gamma knife radiosurgery for uveal melanoma: 12 years of experience. Br J Ophthalmol 93 (1): 40-4, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Muller K, Nowak PJ, de Pan C, et al.: Effectiveness of fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy for uveal melanoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 63 (1): 116-22, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Dieckmann K, Georg D, Bogner J, et al.: Optimizing LINAC-based stereotactic radiotherapy of uveal melanomas: 7 years' clinical experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  66 (4 Suppl 1): 47-52, 2006. Harbour JW, Meredith TA, Thompson PA, et al.: Transpupillary thermotherapy versus plaque radiotherapy for suspected choroidal melanomas. Ophthalmology 110 (11): 2207-14; discussion 2215, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Pilotto E, Vujosevic S, De Belvis V, et al.: Long-term choroidal vascular changes after iodine brachytherapy versus transpupillary thermotherapy for choroidal melanoma. Eur J Ophthalmol 19 (4): 646-53, 2009 Jul-Aug. [PUBMED Abstract] Desjardins L, Lumbroso-Le Rouic L, Levy-Gabriel C, et al.: Combined proton beam radiotherapy and transpupillary thermotherapy for large uveal melanomas: a randomized study of 151 patients. Ophthalmic Res 38 (5): 255-60, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Treatment Options for Iris Melanoma Current Clinical Trials Melanocytic stromal proliferations and nevi of the iris are the most common tumors of the iris, but melanoma is rare.[1,2] Clinical differentiation between an iris nevus and a melanoma might sometimes be difficult and, at times, impossible. 

Melanomas of the iris are usually small discrete lesions, although they may occasionally be diffuse, infiltrative, or multiple and  may result in heterochromia, chronic uveitis, or spontaneous hemorrhage into the anterior chamber of the eye (hyphema). Iris melanomas that involve more than 66% of the angle circumference are associated with secondary glaucoma.[3] Routine evaluation of iris melanomas includes gonioscopy, transillumination of the globe, and indirect ophthalmoscopy with 360° of scleral depression. Photographic documentation is essential to document progression in size or growth of the tumor.[4] Anterior segment fluorescein angiography may be helpful to demonstrate the vascularity of the lesion but is not diagnostic. High-resolution ultrasound biomicroscopy can be used to measure small lesions (basal dimensions and thickness) and to assess tumor involvement of the anterior ciliary body, angle, and overlying sclera.[5] The main disadvantage with this technology is its limited penetration of large lesions.  In these cases, conventional ultrasonography is more accurate. In general, iris melanomas have relatively good outcomes. Only about 3% of these melanomas metastasize within 5 years.[1] Iris melanomas are predominantly of the spindle-cell type and are usually smaller in size than posterior melanomas.  Clinical features, including prominent tumor vascularity, rapid growth, and heterogeneous pigmentation, are associated with an epithelioid cell component.[6] Involvement of the iridocorneal angles is frequently associated with ciliary body invasion.[6] Given the rarity of iris melanomas and their good prognosis, clinical trials with sufficient power are impractical.  Therefore, treatment experience is based principally on case series and case reports.  Conservative management is generally advocated whenever possible, but surgical intervention may be justified with unequivocal tumor growth or extensive disease at initial examination. Treatment options for iris melanoma include the following: Observation with careful follow-up. This option is used in asymptomatic patients with stable lesions; follow-up includes serial photography.[3] Local resection. This option is used when progressive and pronounced growth is documented.[2] Enucleation. This option is used if the tumor is not amenable to local
   resection because of diffuse involvement of the iris, involvement
   of more than 50% of the iris and anterior chamber
   angle, intractable glaucoma, or extraocular
   extension.[7] Plaque radiation therapy. This option is offered as an alternative for
   large, diffuse, surgically nonresectable lesions of the
   iris.[8] Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Albert DM, Kulkarni AD: Intraocular melanoma. In: DeVita VT Jr, Lawrence TS, Rosenberg SA: Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology. 9th ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2011, pp 2090-8. Starr OD, Patel DV, Allen JP, et al.: Iris melanoma: pathology, prognosis and surgical intervention. Clin Experiment Ophthalmol 32 (3): 294-6, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Marcus DM, Sahel JA, Jakobiec FA, et al.: Pigmented tumors of the iris. In: Albert DM, Jakobiec FA, eds.: Principles and Practice of Ophthalmology. WB Saunders Co., 1994, pp 3198-3208. Yap-Veloso MI, Simmons RB, Simmons RJ: Iris melanomas: diagnosis and management. Int Ophthalmol Clin 37 (4): 87-100, 1997 Fall. [PUBMED Abstract] Pavlin CJ, McWhae JA, McGowan HD, et al.: Ultrasound biomicroscopy of anterior segment tumors. Ophthalmology 99 (8): 1220-8, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Conway RM, Chua WC, Qureshi C, et al.: Primary iris melanoma: diagnostic features and outcome of conservative surgical treatment. Br J Ophthalmol 85 (7): 848-54, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Melanocytic tumors of the iris stroma. In: Shields JA: Diagnosis and Management of Intraocular Tumors. C.V. Mosby Company, 1983, pp 83-121. Shields CL, Shields JA, De Potter P, et al.: Treatment of non-resectable malignant iris tumours with custom designed plaque radiotherapy. Br J Ophthalmol 79 (4): 306-12, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Treatment Options for Ciliary Body Melanoma Current Clinical Trials Melanoma involving the ciliary body is a rare tumor that carries a poor prognosis.  In some cases, diagnosis may be difficult because of  similarity to other eye diseases.  The differential diagnosis of ciliary body melanoma is considered in cases of unilateral pigmentary glaucoma and chronic uveitis.[1] Ultrasound biomicroscopy can be used to evaluate tumor shape, thickness, margins, reflectivity, and local invasion.[2,3] Patients with tumors greater than 7 mm in thickness are at increased risk for metastatic disease and melanoma-related death compared with patients with thinner tumors.[4] There are several options for management of ciliary body melanoma. All of them are reported from case series.[Level of evidence C3]  The choice of therapy, however, depends on many factors. Treatment options for ciliary body melanoma include the following: Plaque radiation therapy. Local control rates are high, but treatment is associated with a high incidence of secondary cataract.[4,5] External-beam, charged-particle radiation therapy. This approach is offered at specialized referral centers.  It requires careful patient cooperation, with voluntary fixation of gaze.[6-8] Local tumor resection. This option is mainly suitable for selected ciliary body or anterior choroidal tumors with smaller basal dimension and greater thickness.[9,10] Enucleation. This option is generally reserved for large melanomas when there is no hope of regaining useful vision. It is also indicated in the presence of intractable secondary glaucoma and extraocular extension.[5,8] Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Nguyen QD, Foster CS: Ciliary body melanoma masquerading as chronic uveitis. Ocul Immunol Inflamm 6 (4): 253-6, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Marigo FA, Finger PT, McCormick SA, et al.: Iris and ciliary body melanomas: ultrasound biomicroscopy with histopathologic correlation. Arch Ophthalmol 118 (11): 1515-21, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Daftari I, Barash D, Lin S, et al.: Use of high-frequency ultrasound imaging to improve delineation of anterior uveal melanoma for proton irradiation. Phys Med Biol 46 (2): 579-90, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Gündüz K, Shields CL, Shields JA, et al.: Plaque radiotherapy of uveal melanoma with predominant ciliary body involvement. Arch Ophthalmol 117 (2): 170-7, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Finger PT: Plaque radiation therapy for malignant melanoma of the iris and ciliary body. Am J Ophthalmol 132 (3): 328-35, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Munzenrider JE: Uveal melanomas. Conservation treatment. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 15 (2): 389-402, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Char DH, Kroll SM, Castro J: Ten-year follow-up of helium ion therapy for uveal melanoma. Am J Ophthalmol 125 (1): 81-9, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] De Potter P: [Choroidal melanoma: current therapeutic approaches] J Fr Ophtalmol 25 (2): 203-11, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] De Potter P, Shields CL, Shields JA: New treatment modalities for uveal melanoma. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 7 (3): 27-32, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Char DH, Miller T, Crawford JB: Uveal tumour resection. Br J Ophthalmol 85 (10): 1213-9, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Treatment Options for Small Choroidal Melanoma Current Clinical Trials A wide range of  5-year mortality rates has been reported among patients treated for small choroidal melanomas, with an average rate of about 16%.[1,2] Several studies indicate that the two most important clinical factors predictive of mortality are larger tumor size at the time of treatment and documentation of tumor growth.[3] The management of small choroidal melanomas is controversial.  The likelihood of progression from the time of diagnosis to growth warranting treatment has not been well characterized. Many ophthalmologists advocate initial observation. This initial management strategy is justified on several grounds, including difficulty in establishing a correct diagnosis, lack of documented efficacy for globe-conserving treatments, and concerns for severe treatment-related morbidity. Others  have advocated earlier therapeutic intervention.[4-6] Treatment options for small choroidal melanoma include the following: Observation. This strategy is important for patients with an uncertain diagnosis or in whom tumor growth has not been documented. It is also used for asymptomatic patients with stable lesions (particularly older or debilitated patients) and for patients with a tumor in their only useful eye.[2] Plaque radiation therapy. This treatment is used for small- or medium-sized uveal
melanomas, amelanotic tumors, or tumors that touch the optic disc for greater than 3 clock-hours of optic disk circumference.[7,8] External-beam, charged-particle radiation therapy. This approach is offered at specialized referral centers.  It requires careful patient cooperation, with voluntary fixation of gaze.[7-10] Gamma-knife radiation surgery. This treatment may be a feasible option for small- to medium-sized melanomas.[11-13] Transpupillary thermotherapy. As noted above, this approach has very limited use, but it can be used as a primary treatment or as an adjunctive method to plaque radiation therapy.[5,6,14-18] For more information, see the Role of Transpupillary Thermotherapy section. Local tumor resection. This strategy is used mainly for selected ciliary body or anterior choroidal tumors with smaller basal dimensions and greater thickness.[19] Enucleation. This approach is used when severe intraocular pressure elevation is a factor. It may also be considered with small- and medium-sized melanomas that are invading the tissues of the optic nerve.[20] Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Diener-West M, Hawkins BS, Markowitz JA, et al.: A review of mortality from choroidal melanoma. II. A meta-analysis of 5-year mortality rates following enucleation, 1966 through 1988. Arch Ophthalmol 110 (2): 245-50, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Mortality in patients with small choroidal melanoma. COMS report no. 4. The Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study Group. Arch Ophthalmol 115 (7): 886-93, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Shields CL, Shields JA, Kiratli H, et al.: Risk factors for growth and metastasis of small choroidal melanocytic lesions. Ophthalmology 102 (9): 1351-61, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Shields CL, Cater J, Shields JA, et al.: Combination of clinical factors predictive of growth of small choroidal melanocytic tumors. Arch Ophthalmol 118 (3): 360-4, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Shields CL, Shields JA, Perez N, et al.: Primary transpupillary thermotherapy for small choroidal melanoma in 256 consecutive cases: outcomes and limitations. Ophthalmology 109 (2): 225-34, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Robertson DM, Buettner H, Bennett SR: Transpupillary thermotherapy as primary treatment for small choroidal melanomas. Arch Ophthalmol 117 (11): 1512-9, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Shields CL, Shields JA, Gündüz K, et al.: Radiation therapy for uveal malignant melanoma. Ophthalmic Surg Lasers 29 (5): 397-409, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Finger PT: Radiation therapy for choroidal melanoma. Surv Ophthalmol 42 (3): 215-32, 1997 Nov-Dec. [PUBMED Abstract] Munzenrider JE: Uveal melanomas. Conservation treatment. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 15 (2): 389-402, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Char DH, Kroll SM, Castro J: Ten-year follow-up of helium ion therapy for uveal melanoma. Am J Ophthalmol 125 (1): 81-9, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Woodburn R, Danis R, Timmerman R, et al.: Preliminary experience in the treatment of choroidal melanoma with gamma knife radiosurgery. J Neurosurg 93 (Suppl 3): 177-9, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Modorati G, Miserocchi E, Galli L, et al.: Gamma knife radiosurgery for uveal melanoma: 12 years of experience. Br J Ophthalmol 93 (1): 40-4, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Muller K, Nowak PJ, de Pan C, et al.: Effectiveness of fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy for uveal melanoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 63 (1): 116-22, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Shields CL, Shields JA: Transpupillary thermotherapy for choroidal melanoma. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 10 (3): 197-203, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Godfrey DG, Waldron RG, Capone A: Transpupillary thermotherapy for small choroidal melanoma. Am J Ophthalmol 128 (1): 88-93, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Bartlema YM, Oosterhuis JA, Journée-De Korver JG, et al.: Combined plaque radiotherapy and transpupillary thermotherapy in choroidal melanoma: 5 years' experience. Br J Ophthalmol 87 (11): 1370-3, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Harbour JW, Meredith TA, Thompson PA, et al.: Transpupillary thermotherapy versus plaque radiotherapy for suspected choroidal melanomas. Ophthalmology 110 (11): 2207-14; discussion 2215, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Pilotto E, Vujosevic S, De Belvis V, et al.: Long-term choroidal vascular changes after iodine brachytherapy versus transpupillary thermotherapy for choroidal melanoma. Eur J Ophthalmol 19 (4): 646-53, 2009 Jul-Aug. [PUBMED Abstract] Char DH, Miller T, Crawford JB: Uveal tumour resection. Br J Ophthalmol 85 (10): 1213-9, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Shields JA, Shields CL: Atlas of Intraocular Tumors. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999. Treatment Options for Medium and Large Choroidal Melanoma Current Clinical Trials Eye-sparing radiation therapy, either by plaque brachytherapy or external beam, is the preferred option for most patients with medium-sized choroidal melanoma. Enucleation remains the standard therapy for large choroidal melanomas and melanomas that cause severe glaucoma or invade the optic nerve. Tumor growth pattern is a factor in the therapeutic decision. If there is a diffuse melanoma or extraocular extension, enucleation is considered, but radiation therapy can be employed for less extensive disease. Treatment options for medium and large choroidal melanoma include the following: Medium-sized choroidal melanomas Plaque radiation therapy.[1-4] External-beam, charged-particle radiation therapy. This approach is offered at specialized referral centers.  It requires careful patient cooperation, with voluntary fixation of gaze.[5-7] Local eye-wall resection.[8,9] Combined therapy, with ablative laser coagulation or 
   transpupillary thermotherapy to supplement plaque
   treatment.[10,11] For more information, see the Role of Transpupillary Thermotherapy section. Enucleation. This approach is considered primarily for diffuse
melanomas or for cases in which there are extraocular extension. Radiation complications or tumor recurrence may sometimes  make enucleation necessary.[10] Large choroidal melanomas Enucleation when the tumor is judged to be too large for eye-sparing approaches. Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Karvat A, Duzenli C, Ma R, et al.: The treatment of choroidal melanoma with 198 Au plaque brachytherapy. Radiother Oncol 59 (2): 153-6, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Tabandeh H, Chaudhry NA, Murray TG, et al.: Intraoperative echographic localization of iodine-125 episcleral plaque for brachytherapy of choroidal melanoma. Am J Ophthalmol 129 (2): 199-204, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Diener-West M, Earle JD, Fine SL, et al.: The COMS randomized trial of iodine 125 brachytherapy for choroidal melanoma, III: initial mortality findings. COMS Report No. 18. Arch Ophthalmol 119 (7): 969-82, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Melia BM, Abramson DH, Albert DM, et al.: Collaborative ocular melanoma study (COMS) randomized trial of I-125 brachytherapy for medium choroidal melanoma. I. Visual acuity after 3 years COMS report no. 16. Ophthalmology 108 (2): 348-66, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Char DH, Quivey JM, Castro JR, et al.: Helium ions versus iodine 125 brachytherapy in the management of uveal melanoma. A prospective, randomized, dynamically balanced trial. Ophthalmology 100 (10): 1547-54, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Fuss M, Loredo LN, Blacharski PA, et al.: Proton radiation therapy for medium and large choroidal melanoma: preservation of the eye and its functionality. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 49 (4): 1053-9, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Char DH, Kroll SM, Castro J: Ten-year follow-up of helium ion therapy for uveal melanoma. Am J Ophthalmol 125 (1): 81-9, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Char DH, Miller T, Crawford JB: Uveal tumour resection. Br J Ophthalmol 85 (10): 1213-9, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Peyman GA, Juarez CP, Diamond JG, et al.: Ten years experience with eye wall resection for uveal malignant melanomas. Ophthalmology 91 (12): 1720-5, 1984. [PUBMED Abstract] Seregard S, Landau I: Transpupillary thermotherapy as an adjunct to ruthenium plaque radiotherapy for choroidal melanoma. Acta Ophthalmol Scand 79 (1): 19-22, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Shields JA: The expanding role of laser photocoagulation for intraocular tumors. The 1993 H. Christian Zweng Memorial Lecture. Retina 14 (4): 310-22, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Current Clinical Trials Extrascleral extension confers a poor prognosis. For patients with gross tumor involvement of the orbit, treatment requires orbital exenteration. However, there is no evidence that such radical surgery will prolong life.  Most patients with localized or encapsulated extraocular extension are not exenterated. This subject is controversial.[1-5] No effective method of systemic treatment has been identified for patients with metastatic ocular melanoma. Clinical trials are an option for these patients. Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Shammas HF, Blodi FC: Prognostic factors in choroidal and ciliary body melanomas. Arch Ophthalmol 95 (1): 63-9, 1977. [PUBMED Abstract] Pach JM, Robertson DM, Taney BS, et al.: Prognostic factors in choroidal and ciliary body melanomas with extrascleral extension. Am J Ophthalmol 101 (3): 325-31, 1986. [PUBMED Abstract] Kersten RC, Tse DT, Anderson RL, et al.: The role of orbital exenteration in choroidal melanoma with extrascleral extension. Ophthalmology 92 (3): 436-43, 1985. [PUBMED Abstract] Hykin PG, McCartney AC, Plowman PN, et al.: Postenucleation orbital radiotherapy for the treatment of malignant melanoma of the choroid with extrascleral extension. Br J Ophthalmol 74 (1): 36-9, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Gündüz K, Shields CL, Shields JA, et al.: Plaque radiotherapy for management of ciliary body and choroidal melanoma with extraocular extension. Am J Ophthalmol 130 (1): 97-102, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Current Clinical Trials The prognosis for any patient with recurring or relapsing disease is poor,
regardless of cell type or stage.  The question and selection of further
treatment depends on many factors, including the extent of the lesion, age and
health of the patient, prior treatment, site of recurrence, and
individual patient considerations. Surgical resection of metastases diagnosed subsequent to initial management of ocular melanoma in single-center case series of highly selected patients has been reported. The extent to which the occasional favorable outcomes are the result of strong selection factors is not clear, so this approach cannot be considered standard.[1] Eligible patients should
be advised to consider participation in clinical trials  whenever possible. Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Hsueh EC, Essner R, Foshag LJ, et al.: Prolonged survival after complete resection of metastases from intraocular melanoma. Cancer 100 (1): 122-9, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] The PDQ cancer information summaries are reviewed regularly and updated as new information becomes available.  This section describes the latest changes made to this summary as of the date above. Editorial changes were made to this summary. This summary is written and maintained by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board, which is
editorially independent of NCI.  The summary reflects an independent review of
the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or NIH.  More
information about summary policies and the role of the PDQ Editorial Boards  in
maintaining the PDQ summaries can be found on the About This PDQ Summary and PDQ® Cancer Information for Health Professionals pages. This PDQ cancer information summary for health professionals provides comprehensive, peer-reviewed, evidence-based information about the treatment of intraocular melanoma. It is intended as a resource to inform and assist clinicians in the care of their patients.  It does not provide formal guidelines or recommendations for making health care decisions. This summary is reviewed regularly and updated as necessary by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board, which is editorially independent of the National Cancer Institute (NCI).  The summary reflects an independent review of the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Board members review recently published articles each month to determine whether an article should: be discussed at a meeting, be cited with text, or replace or update an existing article that is already cited. Changes to the summaries are made through a consensus process in which Board members evaluate the strength of the evidence in  the published articles and determine how the article should be included in the summary. Any comments or questions about the summary content should be submitted to Cancer.gov through the NCI website's Email Us. Do not contact the individual Board Members with questions or comments about the summaries. Board members will not respond to individual inquiries. Some of the reference citations in this summary are accompanied by a level-of-evidence designation. These designations are intended to help readers assess the strength of the evidence supporting the use of specific interventions or approaches. The PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board uses a formal evidence ranking system in developing its level-of-evidence designations. PDQ is a registered trademark. Although the content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text, it cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless it is presented in its entirety and is regularly updated. However, an author would be permitted to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks succinctly: [include excerpt from the summary].” The preferred citation for this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Adult Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/eye/hp/intraocular-melanoma-treatment-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389482] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use within the PDQ summaries only. Permission to use images outside the context of PDQ information must be obtained from the owner(s) and cannot be granted by  the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the illustrations in this summary, along with many other cancer-related images, is available in Visuals Online, a collection of over 2,000 scientific images. Based on the strength of the available evidence, treatment options may be described as either “standard” or “under clinical evaluation.” These classifications should not be used as a basis for insurance reimbursement determinations. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s Email Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Advanced Cancer and Caregivers - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/advanced-cancer/caregivers
txt: Caring for someone with advanced cancer brings new challenges and concerns. Things can get harder as your loved one’s cancer progresses. It’s important to take care of yourself and reach out for help. Getting help for yourself will also help your loved one. Caregivers are going through cancer along with the patient. If you’re a caregiver, you may be tired and worried as you cope with your loved one’s cancer. Please see our section, Support for Caregivers of Cancer Patients, which contains tips for dealing with the stresses and feelings that cancer brings. Taking Care of Yourself and Plans and Decisions for End-of-Life Care As A Cancer Caregiver provide more tips specific to caregivers of patients with advanced cancer.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Selected Vegetables/Sun's Soup (PDQ®) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/cam/hp/suns-soup-pdq
txt:  Overview  General Information  History  Laboratory/Animal/Preclinical Studies  Human/Clinical Studies  Adverse Effects  Summary of the Evidence for Selected Vegetables/Sun's Soup  Latest Updates to This Summary (08/24/2018)  About This PDQ Summary  NOTE: There is either no new research on this topic or the recent published research is weak and not appropriate for inclusion in the summary. Therefore, the information in this summary is no longer being updated and is provided for reference purposes only. This cancer information summary provides an overview of the use of Selected Vegetables/Sun's Soup as a treatment for  people with cancer.  The summary includes a brief history of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup and a review of animal and human studies.  The information in the Human/Clinical Studies section is summarized in a table located at the end of that section. This summary contains the following key information: “Selected Vegetables” and “Sun’s Soup” are names given to several different mixtures of vegetables and herbs that have been studied as treatments for cancer.  These mixtures were developed by a single individual. At present, two formulations of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup are marketed in the United States as dietary supplements. The vegetables and herbs in Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup are thought to have anticancer and/or immune-system–stimulating properties. It has been reported that treatment with Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup lengthened the survival of patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer or other types of malignant tumors. However, each study tested different formulations of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup, making the comparison of results across studies difficult. Furthermore, design weaknesses in the studies raise doubts about the reliability of the findings. The developer is conducting or contemplating additional clinical studies of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup. Many of the medical and scientific terms used in the summary are hypertext linked (at first use in each section) to the NCI Dictionary                of Cancer Terms, which is oriented toward nonexperts. When a linked term is clicked, a definition will appear in a separate window. Reference citations in some PDQ cancer information summaries may include links to external websites that are operated by individuals or organizations for the purpose of marketing or advocating the use of specific treatments or products. These reference citations are included for informational purposes only. Their inclusion should not be viewed as an endorsement of the content of the websites, or of any treatment or product, by the PDQ Integrative, Alternative, and Complementary Therapies Editorial Board or the National Cancer Institute. “Selected Vegetables” and “Sun's Soup” are names given to several different mixtures of vegetables and herbs that have been studied as treatments for cancer and other medical conditions, including acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.[1,2]   The original formulation contained shiitake mushroom (Lentinus edodes [Berk.] Singer), mung bean (Phaseolus radiatus L.), Hedyotis diffusa Willd. (also known by the Chinese herbal name Bai Hua She She Cao), and barbat skullcap (Scutellaria barbata D. Don, also known by the Chinese herbal name Ban Zhi Lian). A second formulation, specifically named “Selected Vegetables” (“SV”), was tested in a phase I/II clinical trial that involved patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (refer to the Human/Clinical Studies section of this summary for more information).[1] A third formulation, called “Frozen SV” or “FSV,” has also been studied clinically in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (refer to the Human/Clinical Studies section of this summary for more information).[2] In the United States, dietary supplements are regulated as foods, not drugs.  Therefore, premarket evaluation and approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) are not required unless specific disease prevention or treatment claims are made.  The FDA can, however, remove from the market dietary supplements that it deems unsafe. It should be noted that no formulation of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup has been approved by the FDA for the treatment of cancer or any other medical condition. Because dietary supplements are not formally reviewed for manufacturing consistency, there may be considerable variation from lot to lot, and there is no guarantee that ingredients identified on product labels are present in the specified amounts or present at all. SV/DSV and FSV are reported to contain soybean (Glycine max [L.] Merr.), shiitake mushroom, mung bean, red date (Ziziphus jujuba Miller), scallion (Allium bakeri Regel), garlic (Allium sativum L.), leek (Allium fistulosum L.), lentil (Lens culinaris Medic.), Hawthorn fruit (Crataegus monogyna Jacquin and/or Crataegus 
oxyacantha L.), onion (Allium cepa L.), ginseng (Panax ginseng C.A. Meyer), Angelica root (Angelica sinensis), licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra L.), dandelion root (Taraxacum officinale Weber), senega root (Polygala senega L.), ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe), olive (Olea europaea L.), sesame seed (Sesamum indicum L.), and parsley (Petroselinum crispum [P. Miller] Nyman ex A.W. Hill).[1,2] Many of the ingredients in Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup were chosen because previous biochemical research and traditional Chinese medicine suggested they contain molecules that have anticancer or immunostimulant activity.[1,2] Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup is administered orally as part of the diet.[1,2]      Studies in humans have not always specified a dose or an administration schedule, but daily doses  of 30 g SV/DSV, mixed with water or other soup, or of 10 oz (approximately 283 g) FSV were used in the above-mentioned clinical studies in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer.[1,2] To conduct clinical drug research in the United States, researchers must file an Investigational New Drug (IND) application with the FDA.  An IND must also be obtained for clinical evaluation of dietary supplements as agents for the treatment or prevention of disease.  Because the IND application process is confidential and because the existence of an IND can be disclosed only by the applicants, it is not known whether an IND currently exists for the study of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup as a treatment for cancer or any other disease. In this summary, the specific formulation of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup given to individual patients or groups of patients will be identified wherever possible. Sun AS, Ostadal O, Ryznar V, et al.: Phase I/II study of stage III and IV non-small cell lung cancer patients taking a specific dietary supplement. Nutr Cancer 34 (1): 62-9, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Sun AS, Yeh HC, Wang LH, et al.: Pilot study of a specific dietary supplement in tumor-bearing mice and in stage IIIB and IV non-small cell lung cancer patients. Nutr Cancer 39 (1): 85-95, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Selected Vegetables/Sun's Soup was first conceived as a treatment for cancer in the mid-1980s. In an effort to help a relative who was diagnosed with stage IV non-small cell lung cancer (metastasis to the left adrenal gland), the developer created a mixture that contained shiitake mushroom (Lentinus edodes [Berk.] Singer), mung bean (Phaseolus radiatus L.), Hedyotis diffusa Willd., and barbat skullcap (Scutellaria barbata D. Don) in the belief that these plant materials had anticancer and/or immune-system–stimulating properties.    After the relative appeared to benefit from this treatment (the relative was reported to be alive and cancer free for more than 13 years ), three additional patients (one with stage IV kidney cancer that had metastasized to the lungs, one with stage IV kidney cancer that had metastasized to the liver and to the lungs, and one with stage IV non-small cell lung cancer that had metastasized to the brain) were treated with a variant of the original mixture (i.e., a combination of shiitake mushroom and mung bean).  (Note: No explanation has been given for the omission of Hedyotis diffusa and barbat skullcap for these patients.) These additional patients were also said to benefit from vegetable/herb treatment.   (Refer to the Human/Clinical Studies section of this summary for more information.) In June 1992, the developer filed a patent application for the “Herbal treatment of malignancy,” and a patent was awarded in August 1995. Also in June 1992, the developer initiated a clinical trial in the Czech Republic to test Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup as a treatment for advanced non-small cell lung cancer.[1] A second clinical study (a nonconsecutive case series) that also involved patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer was completed in 1997.[2] It is unclear, however, when patient accrual for this second study began.[2] In both reports of the clinical study results, the authors concluded that patients  who received Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup had prolonged survival.[1,2] (Refer to the Human/Clinical Studies section of this summary for more information.) As noted previously (refer to the General Information section of this summary for more information), the proposed mechanism of action for Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup involves anticancer and/or immune-system–stimulating activities associated with some of the ingredients.[1,2]  The following types of compounds likely found in Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup have been investigated for these activities: protease inhibitors and autoclave-resistant factors, which are found in soybeans (Glycine max L. Merr.); plant sterols; saponin; inositol hexaphosphate (IP6); beta-glucans; lectins; coumestans such as coumestrol; and isoflavones such as daidzein, genistein, biochanin A, and formononetin.[1,2] One beta-glucan found in shiitake mushroom (lentinan) has been used as an adjunctive therapy for cancer (primarily gastric cancer and colorectal cancer) in Japan.[3-6] Treatment with lentinan has been reported to prolong the survival of patients with gastric cancer [3-6] and to improve their quality of life.[3] However, lentinan may not be an active component in Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup. This compound has a large molecular mass and is believed to have only limited oral bioavailability.[5-7] Therefore, lentinan has usually been given by intravenous injection. Nonetheless, other substances in shiitake mushroom have been identified as having greater oral bioavailability, and these substances have shown anticancer activity in animal experiments.[5,7] Sun AS, Ostadal O, Ryznar V, et al.: Phase I/II study of stage III and IV non-small cell lung cancer patients taking a specific dietary supplement. Nutr Cancer 34 (1): 62-9, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Sun AS, Yeh HC, Wang LH, et al.: Pilot study of a specific dietary supplement in tumor-bearing mice and in stage IIIB and IV non-small cell lung cancer patients. Nutr Cancer 39 (1): 85-95, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Nakano H, Namatame K, Nemoto H, et al.: A multi-institutional prospective study of lentinan in advanced gastric cancer patients with unresectable and recurrent diseases: effect on prolongation of survival and improvement of quality of life. Kanagawa Lentinan Research Group. Hepatogastroenterology 46 (28): 2662-8, 1999 Jul-Aug. [PUBMED Abstract] Taguchi T: Clinical efficacy of lentinan on patients with stomach cancer: end point results of a four-year follow-up survey. Cancer Detect Prev Suppl 1: 333-49, 1987. [PUBMED Abstract] Borchers AT, Stern JS, Hackman RM, et al.: Mushrooms, tumors, and immunity. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 221 (4): 281-93, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Kidd PM: The use of mushroom glucans and proteoglycans in cancer treatment. Altern Med Rev 5 (1): 4-27, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Wasser SP, Weis AL: Therapeutic effects of substances occurring in higher Basidiomycetes mushrooms: a modern perspective. Crit Rev Immunol 19 (1): 65-96, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Only limited information is available from laboratory or animal studies of Selected Vegetables/Sun's Soup. The developer’s patent document describes four animal experiments that used two mouse tumor models (mouse sarcoma S1509a, which was used in three of the experiments, and mouse Line 1 lung carcinoma, which was used in one experiment) and that evaluated shiitake mushroom (Lentinus edodes [Berk.] Singer), mung bean (Phaseolus radiatus  L.), Hedyotis diffusa Willd., and barbat skullcap (Scutellaria barbata D. Don). In these experiments, small groups of mice were fed either standard laboratory chow or laboratory chow that had been mixed with one or more of the  four named substances. The mice were fed these diets both before and after they received subcutaneous injections of tumor cells. Results presented in the patent document show that tumor growth was slower in mice fed the experimental diets (i.e., containing the substances) than in mice fed standard laboratory chow. However, the greatest inhibition of tumor growth (up to 85% inhibition) was observed in animals fed diets that contained both mung bean and shiitake mushroom. Results of two additional animal experiments were reported by the developer in a peer-reviewed scientific journal.[1] One experiment was a repetition of the Line 1 lung carcinoma experiment that was described in the developer’s patent document. The results of this experiment were similar to those reported previously: tumor growth was slower in animals fed the experimental diets, with the greatest inhibition of tumor growth (up to 82% inhibition) observed in animals fed a diet that contained both mung bean and shiitake mushroom. The second experiment also used the Line 1 lung carcinoma tumor model.  In this experiment, tumor growth was measured in mice fed either standard laboratory chow or a mixture of standard laboratory chow and DSV (i.e., the commercially available freeze-dried formulation of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup;   refer to the General Information section of this summary for more information). Tumor growth was approximately 2.3 times slower (i.e., approximately 65% growth inhibition) in mice fed standard laboratory chow plus DSV than in mice fed standard laboratory chow alone. Sun AS, Yeh HC, Wang LH, et al.: Pilot study of a specific dietary supplement in tumor-bearing mice and in stage IIIB and IV non-small cell lung cancer patients. Nutr Cancer 39 (1): 85-95, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] The following information is summarized in a table located at the end of this section. The use of Selected Vegetables/Sun's Soup as a treatment for human cancer has been investigated in only a limited manner. All available resources—the developer’s patent document   and the published reports of two clinical studies [1,2]—have identified fewer than 50 treated patients. In 1992, the developer initiated a phase I/II clinical trial in the Czech Republic to test Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup as a treatment for non-small cell lung cancer.[1,2] The trial included a “toxicity arm” to assess the tolerability of long-term administration of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup and a “survival arm” to assess the mixture’s ability to improve survival in patients with advanced disease. Five patients with stage I cancer were included in the toxicity arm; these patients were treated with conventional therapy (surgery plus radiation therapy or radiation therapy alone) in addition to Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup. Nineteen patients with stage III or stage IV disease were included in the survival arm; six of these patients were treated with conventional therapy (radiation therapy alone or chemotherapy alone) in addition to Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup, and 13 were treated with conventional therapy (radiation therapy alone, chemotherapy alone, surgery plus radiation therapy, or chemotherapy plus radiation therapy) (12 patients) or best supportive care (one patient) but not Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup. The intended duration of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup treatment for all patients who received the mixture was 24 months. The intended daily dose was 30 g of freeze-dried powder (i.e., DSV; refer to the General Information section of this summary for more information), mixed with water or other soup. Changes in body weight and changes in Karnofsky Performance Status  (KPS) were measured in both arms of the trial. Median survival time was the primary endpoint in the survival arm. In the toxicity arm, all five patients either gained weight or had no change in weight, which was measured twice, i.e., at study entry and 4 to 12 months later. The KPS score, which was also measured twice (at study entry and 3 months later), improved for four of the five patients and remained stable for the fifth. All five individuals were reported to be alive and well 24 months after diagnosis, and none developed a recurrent tumor during follow-up. The actual duration of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup treatment for these patients ranged from more than 17 months to more than 24 months. From these data, the researchers concluded that Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup was safe, nontoxic, and well tolerated.[1] In the survival arm, the average duration of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup treatment was 7.3 months (range, 4–17 months). The median survival time from diagnosis for the six patients who ingested Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup was 15.5 months (range, 8 to more than 24 months), compared with a median survival time from diagnosis of 4 months (range, 1–12 months) for the 13 patients in the control group. This difference in median survival time was reported to be statistically significant.[1] As in 
the toxicity arm, body weight and KPS were measured twice in the survival arm.  Body-weight measurements were made at study entry and at an average of 4.8 months later (range, 3–7 months) for the six patients in the Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup treatment group. Among the 13 patients in the control group, nine had weight measurements made at study entry and at an average of 2.6 months later (range, 1–7 months); however, the second body-weight measurements were not available for four control subjects. The average percent body-weight loss for the six patients in the Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup treatment group was 2.1%; for the nine patients in the control group, the average percent body-weight loss was 11.6%. This 9.5% difference in body-weight loss was reported to be statistically significant. The two groups of patients had 
similar 
average body weights at study entry.[1] KPS was measured at study entry and again 3 months later for all six patients in the Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup treatment group. For the 13 patients in the control group, KPS was measured at study entry and 1 to 3 months later. The first and second KPS scores did not differ substantially for the patients in the Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup treatment group. In fact, the second score was higher (indicating an improving condition) for five of the six patients; for the sixth patient, the first and second scores were the same.  The second KPS score was lower than the first (indicating a worsening condition) for all 13 patients in the control group. When the average KPS score at study entry for the control subjects was compared with the average score measured 1 to 3 months later, a statistically significant decline in KPS was noted.  The average KPS score at study entry for the patients in the control group was not substantially different from the average KPS score at study entry for patients in the Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup treatment group.[1] Although treatment with Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup was associated with substantial benefits in this trial, the results cannot be considered conclusive. Several major weaknesses in the design and execution of the trial could have affected the outcome. One major weakness is the small numbers of patients enrolled in the survival arm (six patients in the Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup treatment group and 13 in the control group). Larger numbers of patients are needed to obtain reliable results.  Another weakness is that the patients in the survival arm were not randomly assigned to the treatment group and the control group. The treatment group consisted of  individuals who agreed to be treated with Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup; those who refused treatment were assigned to  the control group. It is possible that important, unidentified differences existed between patients in the two groups.[1] In 2001, the developer reported clinical findings for an additional 16 patients who had stage III or stage IV non-small cell lung cancer and who had been treated with Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup.[2] The formulation ingested by these patients was Frozen SV, or FSV.[2] Among the 16 patients, 12 consumed FSV for a period of 2 months or more and were considered eligible for analysis. The duration of FSV treatment for these 12 patients ranged from 5 months to more than 46 months. All of the patients were treated with conventional therapy (one or more of the following: surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or pleurodesis) in addition to treatment with Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup. Among these 12 patients, two had no residual tumor after surgery to remove the primary tumor (n = 1) or surgery to remove the primary tumor and a contralateral lymph node metastasis (n = 1). The patient with the lymph node metastasis consumed FSV for more than 32 months and remained tumor free more than 30 months. This patient survived more than 33 months. The other patient ingested FSV for 14 months and survived 20 months. No information was available concerning the tumor-free period for this second patient. Among the ten remaining eligible patients, two were reported to have  had a complete response to therapy. One of the patients had surgery to remove the primary tumor and then chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and FSV therapy to treat pleural effusion. This patient ingested FSV for 5 months and was still alive at the end of the study period (more than 8 months later). The other patient had surgery to remove the primary tumor, and then radiation therapy and FSV therapy to treat brain and bone metastases. This patient consumed FSV for 16 months and survived 22 months. No information was available about the duration of the tumor-free period for the remaining patient. Among the eight remaining eligible patients, three had a partial response to treatment, and four had stable or progressive disease. Tumor response data were not available for one eligible patient. Overall, the median survival time for the 12 eligible patients was 33.5 months, which is substantially longer than the median survival times cited by the developer for historical control subjects (range, 4–15 months).[2] Furthermore, the KPS score, which was measured at the start of FSV treatment and again 5 or more months later, improved for all but one of the eligible patients. On average, the second KPS score was 63% higher than the first score.[2] As in the case of the phase I/II trial, the results of this nonconsecutive case series should be viewed with caution. Once again, a number of major weaknesses in the design of this clinical study could have influenced its outcome. Among these weaknesses are the following: The study included only a small number of patients. The survival analysis relied on comparisons with historical control subjects rather than an actual control group. All of the patients in the study were aware of the reported benefits of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup and had actively sought treatment with it. With respect to the third point, it is important to note that results obtained with such highly motivated, self-selected patients might not be typical of those obtained with most patients diagnosed with advanced non-small cell lung cancer. A randomized phase III trial (NCT00246727) of patients with stage IIIB or stage IV non-small cell lung cancer was conducted. The primary objective was to compare the survival of patients  receiving Selected Vegetables Sun's Soup dietary supplement with those receiving a placebo while undergoing treatment with best supportive care (i.e., radiation therapy, surgery, or palliative care). Sun AS, Ostadal O, Ryznar V, et al.: Phase I/II study of stage III and IV non-small cell lung cancer patients taking a specific dietary supplement. Nutr Cancer 34 (1): 62-9, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Sun AS, Yeh HC, Wang LH, et al.: Pilot study of a specific dietary supplement in tumor-bearing mice and in stage IIIB and IV non-small cell lung cancer patients. Nutr Cancer 39 (1): 85-95, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] The only reported adverse effect with the use  of Selected Vegetables/Sun's Soup was a feeling of fullness or bloatedness when freeze-dried Selected Vegetables (SV) was consumed in the amount specified in the phase I/II clinical trial.[1] No adverse effects were reported after ingestion of frozen SV.[2] Sun AS, Ostadal O, Ryznar V, et al.: Phase I/II study of stage III and IV non-small cell lung cancer patients taking a specific dietary supplement. Nutr Cancer 34 (1): 62-9, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Sun AS, Yeh HC, Wang LH, et al.: Pilot study of a specific dietary supplement in tumor-bearing mice and in stage IIIB and IV non-small cell lung cancer patients. Nutr Cancer 39 (1): 85-95, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Existing data supporting the effectiveness of Selected Vegetables/Sun's Soup as a treatment for cancer are limited and weak. Only two clinical studies have been reported in the peer-reviewed scientific literature.[1,2] These studies tested the ability of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup to prolong the survival of patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer.   Although ingestion of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup was associated with improved survival in both studies, the results may not be reliable because of the small numbers of patients included in the studies (i.e., a total of 18 evaluable patients) and because of other major weaknesses in the designs of the studies. Different formulations of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup were used in the two studies, making a comparison of the results difficult. Information about the effectiveness of Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup as a treatment for other types of cancer is found only in anecdotal reports, and the US Patent 5437866. and no information is available about the safety or the efficacy of this treatment approach in pediatric patients.  Additional larger, well-designed clinical studies that test identical formulations of vegetables and herbs are necessary to determine more clearly whether Selected Vegetables/Sun’s Soup can be useful in the treatment of non-small cell lung and other types of cancer. Separate levels of evidence scores are assigned to qualifying human studies on the basis of statistical strength of the study design and scientific strength of the treatment outcomes (i.e., endpoints) measured. The resulting two scores are then combined to produce an overall score.               For additional information about    levels of evidence analysis, refer to Levels of Evidence for Human Studies of Integrative, Alternative, and Complementary Therapies. Sun AS, Ostadal O, Ryznar V, et al.: Phase I/II study of stage III and IV non-small cell lung cancer patients taking a specific dietary supplement. Nutr Cancer 34 (1): 62-9, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Sun AS, Yeh HC, Wang LH, et al.: Pilot study of a specific dietary supplement in tumor-bearing mice and in stage IIIB and IV non-small cell lung cancer patients. Nutr Cancer 39 (1): 85-95, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] The PDQ cancer information summaries are reviewed regularly and updated as new information becomes available. This section describes the latest changes made to this summary as of the date above. Editorial changes were made to this summary. This summary is written and maintained by the PDQ Integrative, Alternative, and Complementary Therapies Editorial Board, which is
editorially independent of NCI.  The summary reflects an independent review of
the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or NIH.  More
information about summary policies and the role of the PDQ Editorial Boards  in
maintaining the PDQ summaries can be found on the About This PDQ Summary and PDQ® Cancer Information for Health Professionals pages. This PDQ cancer information summary for health professionals provides comprehensive, peer-reviewed, evidence-based information about the use of selected vegetables/Sun's soup in the treatment of people with cancer. It is intended as a resource to inform and assist clinicians in the care of their patients.  It does not provide formal guidelines or recommendations for making health care decisions. This summary is reviewed regularly and updated as necessary by the PDQ Integrative, Alternative, and Complementary Therapies Editorial Board, which is editorially independent of the National Cancer Institute (NCI).  The summary reflects an independent review of the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Board members review recently published articles each month to determine whether an article should: be discussed at a meeting, be cited with text, or replace or update an existing article that is already cited. Changes to the summaries are made through a consensus process in which Board members evaluate the strength of the evidence in  the published articles and determine how the article should be included in the summary. Any comments or questions about the summary content should be submitted to Cancer.gov through the NCI website's Email Us. Do not contact the individual Board Members with questions or comments about the summaries. Board members will not respond to individual inquiries. Some of the reference citations in this summary are accompanied by a level-of-evidence designation. These designations are intended to help readers assess the strength of the evidence supporting the use of specific interventions or approaches. The PDQ Integrative, Alternative, and Complementary Therapies Editorial Board uses a formal evidence ranking system in developing its level-of-evidence designations. PDQ is a registered trademark. Although the content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text, it cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless it is presented in its entirety and is regularly updated. However, an author would be permitted to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks succinctly: [include excerpt from the summary].” The preferred citation for this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Integrative, Alternative, and Complementary Therapies Editorial Board. PDQ Selected Vegetables/Sun's Soup. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/cam/hp/suns-soup-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389301] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use within the PDQ summaries only. Permission to use images outside the context of PDQ information must be obtained from the owner(s) and cannot be granted by  the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the illustrations in this summary, along with many other cancer-related images, is available in Visuals Online, a collection of over 2,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used as a basis for insurance reimbursement determinations. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s Email Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Childhood Melanoma Treatment - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/skin/patient/child-melanoma-treatment-pdq
txt:  General Information About Childhood Melanoma  Stages of Melanoma  Treatment Option Overview  Treatment of Childhood Melanoma  Treatment of Recurrent Childhood Melanoma  To Learn More About Childhood Melanoma  About This PDQ Summary  Melanoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in melanocytes (cells that color the skin). There are different types of cancer that start in the skin. Unusual moles, exposure to sunlight, and health history can
		  affect the risk of melanoma. Signs of melanoma include a change in the way a mole or pigmented area looks. Tests that examine the skin are used to diagnose melanoma. The skin is the body’s largest organ. It protects against heat, sunlight, injury, and infection. Skin also helps control body temperature and stores water, fat, and vitamin D. The skin has several layers, but the two main layers are the epidermis (upper or outer layer) and the dermis (lower or inner layer). Skin cancer begins in the epidermis, which is made up of three kinds of cells: Squamous cells: Thin, flat cells that form the top layer of the epidermis. Basal cells: Round cells under the squamous cells. Melanocytes: Cells that make melanin and are found in the lower part of the epidermis. Melanin is the pigment that gives skin its natural color. When skin is exposed to the sun or artificial light, melanocytes make more pigment and cause the skin to darken. There are two main forms of skin cancer: melanoma and nonmelanoma (basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin). Melanoma is a rare form of skin cancer. Even though melanoma is rare, it is the most common skin cancer in children. It occurs more often in adolescents aged 15 to 19 years. Melanoma is more likely to invade nearby tissues and spread to other parts of the body than other types of skin cancer. When melanoma starts in the skin, it is called cutaneous melanoma. Melanoma may also occur in mucous membranes (thin, moist layers of tissue that cover surfaces such as the lips) and the eye (intraocular melanoma). This PDQ summary is about cutaneous (skin) melanoma. (See the PDQ summary on Childhood Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma Treatment for more information about intraocular melanoma). Two other types of skin cancer are basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma.  They rarely spread to other parts of the body. (See the PDQ summary on Childhood Basal Cell Carcinoma and Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Skin Treatment for more information on basal cell and squamous cell skin cancer.) Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn’t mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your child's doctor if you think your child may be at risk. Risk factors for childhood melanoma include the following: Having one of the following conditions:Giant melanocytic nevi (large  black spots, which may cover the trunk and thigh).Neurocutaneous melanosis (congenital melanocytic nevi in the skin and the brain).Xeroderma pigmentosum.Hereditary retinoblastoma.A weakened immune system. Having a fair complexion, which includes the following:
Fair skin that freckles and burns easily, does not tan, or tans poorly.
Blue or green or other light-colored eyes.
Red or blond hair.
Being White or having a fair complexion increases the risk of melanoma, but anyone can have melanoma, including people with dark skin. Being exposed to natural sunlight or artificial sunlight (such as from tanning beds). Having several large or many small moles. Having a family history or personal history of unusual moles (atypical nevus syndrome). Having a family history of melanoma. Giant melanocytic nevi (large  black spots, which may cover the trunk and thigh). Neurocutaneous melanosis (congenital melanocytic nevi in the skin and the brain). Xeroderma pigmentosum. Hereditary retinoblastoma. A weakened immune system. Fair skin that freckles and burns easily, does not tan, or tans poorly. Blue or green or other light-colored eyes. Red or blond hair. Being White or having a fair complexion increases the risk of melanoma, but anyone can have melanoma, including people with dark skin. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by melanoma or by other conditions. Check with your child's doctor if your child has any of the following: A mole that: 



 
changes in size, shape, or color.has irregular edges or borders.
is more than one color.
is asymmetrical (if the mole is divided in half, the 2 halves are different in size or shape).itches.
oozes, bleeds, or is ulcerated (a condition in which the top layer of skin breaks down and the tissue below shows through). A change in pigmented (colored) skin. Satellite moles (new moles that grow near an existing mole). changes in size, shape, or color. has irregular edges or borders. is more than one color. is asymmetrical (if the mole is divided in half, the 2 halves are different in size or shape). itches. oozes, bleeds, or is ulcerated (a condition in which the top layer of skin breaks down and the tissue below shows through). If a mole or pigmented area of the skin changes or looks abnormal,
		  the following tests and procedures can help find and diagnose
		  melanoma: Physical exam and health history: An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patient’s health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. Skin exam: A doctor or nurse checks the skin for moles, birthmarks, or other pigmented areas that look abnormal in color,
			 size, shape, or texture. Biopsy: A procedure to remove the abnormal tissue and a small amount of normal tissue around it. A pathologist  looks at the tissue under a microscope to check for cancer cells. It can be hard to tell the difference between a colored mole and an early melanoma lesion. Patients may want to have the sample of tissue checked by a second pathologist. If the abnormal mole or lesion is cancer, the sample of tissue may also be tested for certain gene changes.There are four main types of skin biopsies:Shave biopsy:  A sterile razor blade is used to “shave-off” the abnormal-looking growth.Punch biopsy: A special instrument called a punch or a trephine is used to remove a circle of tissue from the abnormal-looking growth.EnlargePunch biopsy. A sharp, hollow, circular instrument is used to remove a small, round piece of tissue from a lesion on the skin. The instrument is turned clockwise and counterclockwise to cut about 4 millimeters (mm) down to the layer of fatty tissue below the skin and remove the sample of tissue. Skin thickness is different on different parts of the body. Incisional biopsy: A scalpel is used to remove part of a growth.Excisional biopsy: A scalpel is used to remove the entire growth. There are four main types of skin biopsies: Shave biopsy:  A sterile razor blade is used to “shave-off” the abnormal-looking growth. Punch biopsy: A special instrument called a punch or a trephine is used to remove a circle of tissue from the abnormal-looking growth.EnlargePunch biopsy. A sharp, hollow, circular instrument is used to remove a small, round piece of tissue from a lesion on the skin. The instrument is turned clockwise and counterclockwise to cut about 4 millimeters (mm) down to the layer of fatty tissue below the skin and remove the sample of tissue. Skin thickness is different on different parts of the body. Incisional biopsy: A scalpel is used to remove part of a growth. Excisional biopsy: A scalpel is used to remove the entire growth. After melanoma has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread to other parts of the body. There are three ways cancer spreads in the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. Sometimes childhood melanoma recurs (comes back) after treatment. The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the skin or to other
parts of the body is called staging. There is no standard staging system for childhood melanoma. To plan treatment, it is important to know
whether melanoma has spread to lymph nodes or to other parts of the body. The following procedures may be used to find out if cancer has spread: Chest x-ray: An x-ray of the organs and bones inside the chest.  An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles.  The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.  This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. MRI: A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI).EnlargeMagnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan. The child lies on a table that slides into the MRI machine, which takes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. The positioning of the child on the table depends on the part of the body being imaged. PET scan: A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body.  A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein.  The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body.  Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do.EnlargePositron emission tomography (PET) scan. The child lies on a table that slides through the PET scanner. The head rest and white strap help the child lie still.  A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into the child's vein, and a scanner makes a picture of where the glucose is being used in the body.  Cancer cells show up brighter in the picture because they take up more glucose than normal cells do. Ultrasound: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes.  The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. The picture can be printed to be looked at later. Sentinel lymph node biopsy: The removal of the sentinel lymph node during surgery. The sentinel lymph node is the first lymph node in a group of lymph nodes to receive lymphatic drainage from the primary tumor. It is the first lymph node the cancer is likely to spread to from the primary tumor.  A radioactive substance and/or blue dye is injected near the tumor.  The substance or dye flows through the lymph ducts to the lymph nodes.  The first lymph node to receive the substance or dye is removed.   A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells.  If cancer cells are not found, it may not be necessary to remove more lymph nodes. Sometimes, a sentinel lymph node is found in more than one group of nodes.EnlargeSentinel lymph node biopsy of the skin. A radioactive substance and/or blue dye is injected near the tumor (first panel). The injected material is detected visually and/or with a probe that detects radioactivity (middle panel). The sentinel nodes (the first lymph nodes to take up the material) are removed and checked for cancer cells (last panel). Lymph node dissection: A surgical procedure in which lymph nodes are removed and a sample of tissue is checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. For a regional lymph node dissection, some of the lymph nodes in the tumor area are removed. For a radical lymph node dissection, most or all of the lymph nodes in the tumor area are removed. This procedure is also called a lymphadenectomy. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if  melanoma spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually melanoma cells. The disease is metastatic melanoma, not lung cancer. The cancer may come back in the skin, lymph nodes, or in other parts of the body. There are different types of treatment for children with melanoma. Children with melanoma should have their treatment planned by a team of doctors who are experts in treating childhood cancer. Three types of standard treatment are used:SurgeryImmunotherapyTargeted therapy New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Treatment for childhood melanoma may cause side effects. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Follow-up tests may be needed. Surgery Immunotherapy Targeted therapy Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials.  A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the  standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Because cancer in children is rare, taking part in a clinical trial should be considered.  Some clinical trials are open only to patients  who have not started treatment. Treatment will be overseen by a pediatric oncologist, a doctor who specializes in treating children with cancer. The pediatric oncologist works with other pediatric health professionals who are experts in treating children with cancer and who specialize in certain areas of medicine. This may include the following specialists and others: Pediatrician. Dermatologist. Pediatric surgeon. Pathologist. Social worker. Rehabilitation specialist. Psychologist. Child-life specialist. Surgery to remove the
			 tumor is used to treat childhood melanoma. A wide local excision is used to remove the melanoma and some of the normal tissue around it. Skin grafting (taking skin from another part of the body to replace the skin that is removed) may be done to cover the wound caused by surgery. Nearby lymph nodes with cancer may also be removed. Immunotherapy is a treatment that uses the patient's immune system to fight cancer. Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the body's natural defenses against cancer. This type of cancer treatment is also called biotherapy or biologic therapy. Immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy: Immunotherapy uses the body’s immune system to fight cancer. This animation explains one type of immunotherapy that uses immune checkpoint inhibitors to treat cancer.There are different types of immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy:PD-1 inhibitor: PD-1 is a protein on the surface of T cells that helps keep the body’s immune responses in check. When PD-1 attaches to another protein called PDL-1 on a tumor cell, it stops the T cell from killing the tumor cell. PD-1 inhibitors attach to PDL-1 and allow the T cells to kill tumor cells. Pembrolizumab and nivolumab are used to treat melanoma that has spread to lymph nodes and are being studied to treat recurrent melanoma.EnlargeImmune checkpoint inhibitor. Checkpoint proteins, such as PD-L1 on tumor cells and PD-1 on T cells, help keep immune responses in check. The binding of PD-L1 to PD-1 keeps T cells from killing tumor cells in the body (left panel). Blocking the binding of PD-L1 to PD-1 with an immune checkpoint inhibitor (anti-PD-L1 or anti-PD-1) allows the T cells to kill tumor cells (right panel).CTLA-4 inhibitor: CTLA-4 is a protein on the surface of T cells that helps keep the body’s immune responses in check. When CTLA-4 attaches to another protein called B7 on a cancer cell, it stops the T cell from killing the cancer cell. CTLA-4 inhibitors attach to CTLA-4 and allow the T cells to kill cancer cells. Ipilimumab is used to treat melanoma that has spread to lymph nodes or to other parts of the body and is being studied to treat recurrent melanoma.EnlargeImmune checkpoint inhibitor. Checkpoint proteins, such as B7-1/B7-2 on antigen-presenting cells (APC) and CTLA-4 on T cells, help keep the body’s immune responses in check. When the T-cell receptor (TCR) binds to antigen and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins on the APC and CD28 binds to B7-1/B7-2 on the APC, the T cell can be activated. However, the binding of B7-1/B7-2 to CTLA-4 keeps the T cells in the inactive state so they are not able to kill tumor cells in the body (left panel). Blocking the binding of B7-1/B7-2 to CTLA-4 with an immune checkpoint inhibitor (anti-CTLA-4 antibody) allows the T cells to be active and to kill tumor cells (right panel). There are different types of immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy: PD-1 inhibitor: PD-1 is a protein on the surface of T cells that helps keep the body’s immune responses in check. When PD-1 attaches to another protein called PDL-1 on a tumor cell, it stops the T cell from killing the tumor cell. PD-1 inhibitors attach to PDL-1 and allow the T cells to kill tumor cells. Pembrolizumab and nivolumab are used to treat melanoma that has spread to lymph nodes and are being studied to treat recurrent melanoma.EnlargeImmune checkpoint inhibitor. Checkpoint proteins, such as PD-L1 on tumor cells and PD-1 on T cells, help keep immune responses in check. The binding of PD-L1 to PD-1 keeps T cells from killing tumor cells in the body (left panel). Blocking the binding of PD-L1 to PD-1 with an immune checkpoint inhibitor (anti-PD-L1 or anti-PD-1) allows the T cells to kill tumor cells (right panel). CTLA-4 inhibitor: CTLA-4 is a protein on the surface of T cells that helps keep the body’s immune responses in check. When CTLA-4 attaches to another protein called B7 on a cancer cell, it stops the T cell from killing the cancer cell. CTLA-4 inhibitors attach to CTLA-4 and allow the T cells to kill cancer cells. Ipilimumab is used to treat melanoma that has spread to lymph nodes or to other parts of the body and is being studied to treat recurrent melanoma.EnlargeImmune checkpoint inhibitor. Checkpoint proteins, such as B7-1/B7-2 on antigen-presenting cells (APC) and CTLA-4 on T cells, help keep the body’s immune responses in check. When the T-cell receptor (TCR) binds to antigen and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins on the APC and CD28 binds to B7-1/B7-2 on the APC, the T cell can be activated. However, the binding of B7-1/B7-2 to CTLA-4 keeps the T cells in the inactive state so they are not able to kill tumor cells in the body (left panel). Blocking the binding of B7-1/B7-2 to CTLA-4 with an immune checkpoint inhibitor (anti-CTLA-4 antibody) allows the T cells to be active and to kill tumor cells (right panel). Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to attack cancer cells.  Targeted therapies usually cause less harm to normal cells than chemotherapy or radiation therapy do. The following type of targeted therapy is being used or studied in the treatment of melanoma: Signal transduction inhibitor therapy: Signal transduction inhibitors block signals that are passed from one molecule to another inside a cell. Blocking these signals may kill cancer cells. They are used to treat some patients with advanced melanoma or tumors that cannot be removed by surgery. Signal transduction inhibitors include the following: 
     BRAF inhibitors (dabrafenib, vemurafenib , or encorafenib) that block the activity of proteins made by mutant BRAF genes.MEK inhibitors (trametinib or binimetinib) that block proteins called MEK1 and MEK2 which affect the growth and survival of cancer cells. BRAF inhibitors (dabrafenib, vemurafenib , or encorafenib) that block the activity of proteins made by mutant BRAF genes. MEK inhibitors (trametinib or binimetinib) that block proteins called MEK1 and MEK2 which affect the growth and survival of cancer cells. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. To learn more about side effects that begin during treatment for cancer, visit Side Effects. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer  treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first  to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. As your child goes through treatment, they will have follow-up tests or checkups. Some tests that were done to diagnose or stage the cancer may be repeated to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your child's condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview  section. Treatment of newly diagnosed melanoma that has not spread to lymph nodes or other parts of the body includes the following: Surgery to remove the tumor and some healthy tissue around it. Treatment of newly diagnosed melanoma that has spread to nearby lymph nodes includes the following: Surgery to remove the tumor and the lymph nodes with cancer. Immunotherapy with immune checkpoint inhibitors (pembrolizumab, ipilimumab, or nivolumab). Targeted therapy with BRAF inhibitors (vemurafenib, dabrafenib, or encorafenib) alone or with MEK inhibitors (trametinib or binimetinib). Treatment of newly diagnosed melanoma that has spread to other parts of the body may include the following: Immunotherapy (ipilimumab). A clinical trial of an oral targeted therapy drug (dabrafenib) in children and adolescents. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview  section. Treatment of recurrent melanoma in children may include the following: A clinical trial that checks a sample of the patient's tumor for certain gene changes. The type of targeted therapy that will be given to the patient depends on the type of gene change. A clinical trial of immunotherapy with immune checkpoint inhibitors (pembrolizumab, nivolumab,   or ipilimumab) in children and adolescents. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For more information from the National Cancer Institute about melanoma, see the following: Skin Cancer (Including Melanoma) Home Page Skin Cancer Prevention Skin Cancer Screening Sentinel Lymph Node Biopsy Immunotherapy to Treat Cancer Targeted Cancer Therapies Moles to Melanoma: Recognizing the ABCDE Features For more childhood cancer information and other general cancer resources, visit: About Cancer Childhood Cancers CureSearch for Children's Cancer Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer Adolescents and Young Adults with Cancer Children with Cancer: A Guide for Parents Cancer in Children and Adolescents Staging Coping with Cancer Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer For Survivors and Caregivers Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish. PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the treatment of childhood melanoma.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board. A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Childhood Melanoma Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/skin/patient/child-melanoma-treatment-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online. Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NIH/NSF accelerate biomedical research innovations - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2014/icorpsnihnsf
txt:  Posted:
June 18, 2014  240-760-6600 I-Corps at NIH pilot program to train business-minded biotech researchers A collaboration between the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the National Institutes of Health will give NIH-funded researchers training to help them evaluate their scientific discoveries for commercial potential, with the aim of accelerating biomedical innovations into applied health technologies. I-Corps at NIH is a pilot of the NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) program specially tailored for biomedical research. Academic researchers and entrepreneurs with Small Business Innovation Research and Small Business Technology Transfer (SBIR/STTR) Phase I awards – awards that establish feasibility of proof of concept for commercializable technology – from participating NIH institutes will be eligible to apply to I-Corps at NIH. NIH will begin outreach to the small business research community with a June 25 program briefing at the 2014 BIO International Convention in San Diego, and a webinar on July 2. The I-Corps Teams curriculum is a nine-week boot camp in which experienced business-savvy instructors work closely with teams of researchers to help them explore potential markets for their federally funded innovations. I-Corps instructors take a scientific method-based approach to customer discovery that resonates with scientists and engineers. While I-Corps instructors typically have a wide range of expertise, I-Corps at NIH will be taught by instructors who have biomedical business experience. Providing tools for prospective entrepreneurs The NIH institutes that will participate in the pilot program are the National Cancer Institute, the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences. Michael Weingarten, director of the NCI SBIR Development Center, said he and his colleagues initially reached out to NSF because they witnessed the difference I-Corps made for the graduates. To date, more than 300 three-person teams have completed the NSF I-Corps training, including those supported by the Department of Energy’s Advanced Research Projects Agency. “I-Corps will help teach NIH-funded start-ups how to build scalable business models around new technologies they’re developing for the detection and treatment of disease. The program sheds new light on how companies can deal with important business risks such as protecting intellectual property, and developing regulatory and reimbursement strategies,” Weingarten said. I-Corps will supplement SBIR/STTR awardees’ scientific skills through real time interactions with over 100 potential customers to validate their technology’s market potential. The 24 selected teams will receive supplemental funding from NIH to support entrepreneurial training, mentorship and collaboration opportunities. “This new collaboration with NIH is further evidence of the flexibility and efficacy of the I-Corps model,” said Pramod Khargonekar, NSF assistant director for engineering. “Translating basic biomedical research to the marketplace has its own particular set of challenges, which we recognize. By focusing and adapting the I-Corps curriculum to the life sciences, we expect biomedical researchers will be better-equipped to enter the business arena.” NIH awards more than $700 million in SBIR/STTR research and development awards each year. “This pilot will leverage NIH’s robust SBIR/STTR program and further NIH’s mission to advance our understanding of human illness and treatment of disease and disability,” said NIH SBIR/STTR program coordinator Matthew Portnoy. “We look forward to this collaborative endeavor with NSF.” A sustainable innovation ecosystem The I-Corps network continues to undergo strategic expansion. In addition to the pilot, existing NIH-funded programs can apply to become new NSF I-Corps sites to broaden the I-Corps network. These programs include the NIH Centers for Accelerated Innovation and, which focus on academic researchers with technologies that have not yet led to the formation of a startup or have been licensed by an existing company. All people and organizations involved in I-Corps become part of the NSF-established National Innovation Network, a nationwide web created to leverage the community that has developed among the grantees to increase the program's impact. NCI will lead outreach to the small business community in coming weeks, beginning with a briefing on the program at the 2014 BIO International Convention, the world's largest gathering of the biotechnology industry, on June 25 from 2-3 p.m. PDT in San Diego and a webinar on July 2. Steve Blank, a serial entrepreneur and academic who developed the original course which I-Corps is based on, will participate in both events. For more information about I-Corps at NIH, please visit http://sbir.cancer.gov/icorps and http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PAR-14-261.html For more information about NSF I-Corps, please visit http://www.nsf.gov/news/special_reports/i-corps/ ### I-Corps is a common law trademark of the National Science Foundation.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Pomalidomide - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/pomalidomide
txt: This page contains brief information about pomalidomide
         and a collection of links to more information about the use of 
         this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Pomalidomide
         is approved 
         to treat:  AIDS-related Kaposi sarcoma in adults whose disease has gotten worse after treatment with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART).¹ Kaposi sarcoma in adults who are HIV negative.¹ Multiple myeloma. It is used with dexamethasone to treat adults whose disease has gotten worse during or after treatment with at least two other therapies that included lenalidomide and a proteasome inhibitor.  ¹This use is approved under FDA’s Accelerated Approval Program. As a condition of approval, confirmatory trial(s) must show that pomalidomide provides a clinical benefit in these patients. Pomalidomide
         is only available as part of a special program called Pomalyst REMS  (Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies). Pomalidomide is also being studied in the treatment of other types of
         cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Pomalidomide - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Find Clinical Trials for Pomalidomide - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Annual Report to the Nation shows progress against cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2022/annual-report-to-the-nation-2022
txt:  Posted:
October 27, 2022  240-760-6600 Overall cancer death rates continued to decline among men, women, children, and adolescents and young adults in every major racial and ethnic group in the United States from 2015 to 2019, according to the latest Annual Report to the Nation on the Status of Cancer. From 2014 to 2018, overall cancer incidence, or new cases of cancer, remained stable for men and children but increased for women and adolescents and young adults. This year’s report, published October 27, 2022, in Cancer, also highlights longer-term trends in pancreatic cancer, as well as racial and ethnic disparities in incidence and death rates for many individual cancer sites. All of the findings in this report are based on data from before the COVID-19 pandemic. “Today’s report is good news in our fight against cancer and is a reminder of the importance of President Biden’s Cancer Moonshot℠ initiative,” said Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Xavier Becerra. “I’m deeply impressed by the progress we’re making against cancer and firmly believe we can meet the President’s goal of reducing the death rate from cancer by at least 50% over the next 25 years. We can and must end cancer as we know it.” The Annual Report to the Nation on the Status of Cancer is a collaborative effort among the National Cancer Institute (NCI), part of the National Institutes of Health; the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); the American Cancer Society (ACS); and the North American Association of Central Cancer Registries (NAACCR). The report is based on a combined cancer incidence data set from NAACCR composed of data collected by CDC’s National Program of Cancer Registries (NPCR) and NCI’s Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program, as well as mortality data from CDC’s National Center for Health Statistics. The report shows that from 2015 to 2019, overall cancer death rates decreased by 2.1% per year in men and women combined. Among men, death rates decreased by 2.3% per year; among women, death rates decreased by 1.9% per year. The annual declines in death rates accelerated from 2001 to 2019 in both men and women. The declines in death rates were steepest in lung cancer and melanoma (by 4% to 5% per year) among both men and women. Death rates increased for cancers of the pancreas, brain, and bones and joints among men, and for cancers of the pancreas and uterus among women. “The findings in this year’s Annual Report to the Nation show our ongoing progress against cancer, continuing a more than two-decade trend in declining mortality that reflects improvements in preventing, detecting, and treating cancer,” said Monica M. Bertagnolli, M.D., director of NCI. “The advances shown in the report underscore the importance of working together across society to develop effective, equitable approaches to tackle this complex disease. I look forward to working with all our partners in the cancer community to meet these challenges head-on, because people affected by cancer—and that includes all of us—are counting on it.” The report showed that cancer incidence rates were relatively stable in men and women combined from 2014 to 2018. Among men, incidence rates remained stable during this period, but among women incidence rates rose by 0.2% per year. Over the same time period, incidence rates increased for three of the 18 most common cancers among men: pancreas, kidney, and testis. Incidence rates in men remained stable for seven of the most common cancers and decreased for the remaining eight cancers. For women, incidence rates increased for seven of the 18 most common cancers: liver, melanoma, kidney, myeloma, pancreas, breast, and oral cavity and pharynx. Incidence rates among women remained stable for four of the most common cancers and decreased for the other seven cancers. In men, the greatest incidence rate increase was seen in pancreatic cancer, which increased by 1.1% per year, and the steepest incidence rate decrease was seen in lung cancer, which fell by 2.6% per year. In women, melanoma had the steepest increase in incidence, rising by 1.8% per year, and thyroid cancer had the sharpest decrease, falling by 2.9% per year. “Through funding scientific breakthroughs and raising awareness about prevention and early detection, we are making progress against a subset of the more than 200 diseases we call cancer,” said Karen E. Knudsen, M.B.A, Ph.D., chief executive officer, American Cancer Society. “However, for certain cancer types, concerning trends persist, and durable cures remain elusive for many people. We are committed to improving the lives of all cancer patients and their families, through accelerating research, increasing access to care through advocacy, and by providing direct patient support in communities across the nation, toward the shared goal of eliminating cancer as we know it.” Among other key findings of this year’s report: Overall cancer incidence rates during 2014 to 2018 were highest among non-Hispanic American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) people, followed closely by non-Hispanic White people and non-Hispanic Black people. Overall cancer incidence rates were lowest among non-Hispanic Asian/Pacific Islander (API) and Hispanic people.  Incidence rates for all sites combined decreased among non-Hispanic Black, non-Hispanic API, and Hispanic men, but increased among non-Hispanic White, non-Hispanic API, non-Hispanic AI/AN, and Hispanic women from 2014 to 2018. Incidence rates were stable among non-Hispanic White and non-Hispanic AI/AN men and non-Hispanic Black women.  Among children younger than age 15, overall cancer death rates decreased from 2015 to 2019, and incidence rates remained stable from 2014 to 2018. Overall cancer incidence rates were stable for non-Hispanic Black children over this period but increased for non-Hispanic White, non-Hispanic API, non-Hispanic AI/AN, and Hispanic children.  Among adolescents and young adults ages 15 to 39, overall cancer incidence rates increased by 0.9% per year from 2014 to 2018. The overall cancer death rate decreased by 3.0% per year from 2001 to 2005, but the decline slowed to 0.9% per year from 2005 to 2019.  The incidence of breast cancer, the most common cancer among adolescents and young adults, increased by an average of 1.0% per year from 2010 to 2018.  The researchers noted that racial and ethnic disparities exist for many individual cancer sites. For example, from 2014 to 2018, incidence rates for bladder cancer declined in non-Hispanic White, non-Hispanic Black, non-Hispanic API, and Hispanic men but increased among non-Hispanic AI/AN men. Incidence rates for uterine cancer increased among women of every racial and ethnic group from 2014 to 2018 except for non-Hispanic White women, who had stable rates. From 2015 to 2019, prostate cancer death rates were stable among non-Hispanic White and non-Hispanic Black men but decreased among non-Hispanic API, non-Hispanic AI/AN, and Hispanic men. Colorectal cancer death rates were stable among non-Hispanic AI/AN men but decreased in men of all other racial and ethnic groups. Among women, death rates for lung, breast, and colorectal cancer decreased in nearly every racial and ethnic group. The exceptions were non-Hispanic API women, among whom breast cancer death rates remained stable, and non-Hispanic AI/AN women, among whom breast cancer death rates increased and colorectal cancer death rates remained stable. “Factors such as race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status should not play a role in people’s ability to be healthy or determine how long they live,” said Lisa C. Richardson, M.D., M.P.H., director of CDC’s Division of Cancer Prevention and Control. “CDC works with its public health partners—within and outside the government—to address these disparities and advance health equity through a range of key initiatives, including programs, research, and policy initiatives. We know that we can meet this challenge together and create an America where people are free of cancer.” This year’s report includes a special focus on trends in pancreatic cancer incidence, death, and survival rates. Although pancreatic cancer accounts for only 3% of new cancer diagnoses, it accounts for 8% of cancer deaths and is the fourth leading cause of cancer deaths in the United States for both men and women. From 2001 to 2018, incidence rates of pancreatic cancer increased by 1% per year among both men and women, and from 2001 to 2019, death rates increased by 0.2% per year for both sexes. From 2001 to 2018, incidence rates of two common subtypes of pancreatic cancer, neuroendocrine tumors and adenocarcinomas, increased in both men and women, while unspecified subtypes and other pancreatic tumors decreased. The report also describes survival improvements by subtype. For example, one-year relative survival of people diagnosed with pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors increased from 65.9% to 84.2% between 2001 and 2017, and for people diagnosed with pancreatic adenocarcinomas it increased from 24.0% to 36.7%. Five-year relative survival also increased between 2001 and 2013, from 43.4% to 65.2% for people with pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, and from 4.4% to 6.6% for people with pancreatic adenocarcinoma. These improvements in survival may be associated with improvements in therapy, the researchers said. No improvement was seen for unspecified and other pancreatic tumors, which tended to have a higher proportion diagnosed at older ages than the other types. The researchers noted that the increases in survival for both adenocarcinomas and neuroendocrine tumors are tempered by the overall increase in the incidence of pancreatic cancer, which is generally attributed to the growing prevalence of obesity. And progress in treating pancreatic adenocarcinomas, which account for 80% of pancreatic cancer cases, remains incremental at best, the researchers said. “Pancreatic cancer incidence and survival reflect both the underlying risk of disease as well as the difficulty of diagnosing pancreatic cancer at a treatable stage,” said Betsy A. Kohler, M.P.H., NAACCR executive director. “As advancements in screening technology and effective treatments for early-stage disease become available, we are hopeful for greater improvements in pancreatic cancer survival, which historically has been a particularly lethal cancer type.” For more about the report, see: https://seer.cancer.gov/report_to_nation/. About the National Cancer Institute (NCI): NCI leads the National Cancer Program and NIH’s efforts to dramatically reduce the prevalence of cancer and improve the lives of cancer patients and their families, through research into prevention and cancer biology, the development of new interventions, and the training and mentoring of new researchers. For more information about cancer, please visit the NCI website at cancer.gov or call NCI’s contact center, the Cancer Information Service, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation’s medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit nih.gov. About the American Cancer Society (ACS): The American Cancer Society is a global grassroots force of 1.5 million volunteers dedicated to saving lives, celebrating lives, and leading the fight for a world without cancer. For more than 100 years, the American Cancer Society has been the preeminent cancer-fighting organization in the United States through research, education, advocacy, and patient services. We have helped lead the evolution in the way the world prevents, detects, treats, and thinks about cancer. For more information go to www.cancer.org. About the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): CDC works 24/7 protecting America’s health, safety, and security. Whether diseases start at home or abroad, are curable or preventable, chronic or acute, or from human activity or deliberate attack, CDC responds to America’s most pressing health threats. CDC is headquartered in Atlanta and has experts located throughout the United States and the world. About the North American Association of Central Cancer Registries (NAACCR): The North American Association of Central Cancer Registries, Inc., is a professional organization that develops and promotes uniform data standards for cancer registration; provides education and training; certifies population-based registries; aggregates and publishes data from central cancer registries; and promotes the use of cancer surveillance data and systems for cancer control and epidemiologic research, public health programs, and patient care to reduce the burden of cancer in North America. For more, see naaccr.org.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: HPV Testing and Self-Collection in Argentina - Global Cancer Research and Control Seminar Series - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/cgh/events/hpv-testing-self-collection-argentina
txt: September 14, 2021
                                            |
                        9:00 AM
                        –
                        10:00 AM Add to Outlook Calendar Silvina Arrossi, MSc, Ph.D, is a senior researcher at the National Council for Scientific and Technological Research (CONICET) and at the Centro de Estudios de Estado y Sociedad (CEDES), Argentina. From 2008-2018 she served as the Scientific Coordinator of the National Program on Cervical Cancer Prevention, Argentina, and since 2019 as a member of its Scientific Committee. Dr. Arrossi is the principal investigator of several national and international research projects aimed at improving the prevention of cervical cancer. Currently, she serves as a consultant to the World Health Organization in the area of cancer control program organization and management. In addition, she serves as a member of the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) Regional Advisory Board for Latin America and of the “Initiative for a global data repository on Cancer Screening in 5 Continents (CanScreen5)” Advisory Board led by IARC-WHO. Dr. Arrossi also serves as an adviser of ministries of health of several Latin American countries.
Dr. Arrossi's main areas of research include the organization of cancer prevention and control programs, the analysis of social inequalities in access to health services, and the social and economic cost of cancer. Her publications include papers in peer-reviewed journals, book chapters, and programmatic materials. Register for the Introduction of HPV Testing and HPV Self-Collection in Argentina seminar.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Stomach Cancer in Children - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/stomach/childhood
txt: Anatomy of the digestive tract. The digestive tract is made up of organs that food and liquids travel through when they are swallowed, digested, absorbed, and leave the body as feces. These organs include the mouth, pharynx (throat), esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, rectum, and anus. Childhood stomach cancer is a very rare cancer that starts in the cells lining the stomach. The stomach is an organ on the left side of the upper abdomen that digests food. The stomach is part of the digestive tract, a series of hollow, muscular organs joined in a long, twisting tube from the mouth to the anus. The digestive tract processes nutrients in foods that are eaten and helps pass waste material out of the body: Food moves from the throat to the stomach through a tube called the esophagus.  After food enters the stomach, it is broken down by stomach muscles that mix the food and liquid with digestive juices.  After leaving the stomach, partly-digested food passes into the small intestine and then into the large intestine.  The end of the large intestine, called the rectum, stores the waste from the digested food until it is pushed out of the anus during a bowel movement.   Causes and risk factors for childhood stomach cancer  Genetic counseling for children with stomach cancer  Symptoms of childhood stomach cancer  Diagnosis of childhood stomach cancer  Getting a second opinion  Prognostic factors for childhood stomach cancer  Stages of childhood stomach cancer  Types of treatment for childhood stomach cancer  Treatment of childhood stomach cancer  Side effects of treatment  Follow-up testing  Coping with cancer  Causes and risk factors for childhood stomach cancer Genetic counseling for children with stomach cancer Symptoms of childhood stomach cancer Diagnosis of childhood stomach cancer Getting a second opinion Prognostic factors for childhood stomach cancer Stages of childhood stomach cancer Types of treatment for childhood stomach cancer Treatment of childhood stomach cancer Side effects of treatment Follow-up testing Coping with cancer Causes and risk factors for childhood stomach cancer Childhood stomach cancer is caused by certain changes to the way stomach cells function, especially how they grow and divide into new cells. Often, the exact cause of the cell changes is unknown. To learn more about how cancer develops, see What Is Cancer? A risk factor is anything that increases the chance of getting a disease. Not every child with a risk factor will develop stomach cancer, and it will develop in some children who don't have a known risk factor. Risk factors for childhood stomach cancer include: H. pylori infection. Chronic infection of the mucosal layer of the stomach with H. pylori is a risk factor for stomach cancer. This bacterium spreads from person to person through direct contact with saliva, vomit, or stool. Although many people with chronic H. pylori infections do not have symptoms, some develop stomach ulcers or inflammation of the stomach called atrophic gastritis. In some people, atrophic gastritis leads to increasingly severe changes in the stomach lining and eventually to stomach cancer or gastric MALT lymphoma. Treatment of H. pylori infections reduces the risk of these types of stomach cancer. 
	To learn more, see H. pylori and cancer.  Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). HDGC is a rare, inherited type of stomach cancer caused by a mutation (change) in the CDH1 gene.
	To learn more, see HDGC.  Talk with your child’s doctor if you think your child might be at risk of stomach cancer. Genetic counseling for children with stomach cancer It may not be clear from the family medical history whether a child with stomach cancer has an inherited condition that increased their risk. Genetic testing may help explain why a child develops a rare cancer or a cancer that is usually seen in adults, such as stomach cancer. Genetic counselors and other specially trained health professionals can discuss your child's diagnosis and your family's medical history to help you understand: your options for CDH1 gene testing for hereditary diffuse gastric cancer  the risk of other cancers for your child  the risk of stomach cancer and other cancers for your child's siblings  the risks and benefits of learning genetic information  Genetic counselors can also help you cope with your child’s genetic testing results, including how to discuss the results with family members. Symptoms of childhood stomach cancer Many children do not have symptoms of stomach cancer until the cancer has spread.  It’s important to check with your child’s doctor if your child has any symptoms below: stomach pain  loss of appetite  weight loss for no known reason  nausea  vomiting  constipation or diarrhea  weakness  anemia (symptoms of which may include tiredness, dizziness, fast or irregular heartbeat, shortness of breath, and pale skin)  These symptoms may be caused by conditions other than childhood stomach cancer. The only way to know is to see your child’s doctor. The doctor will ask you when the symptoms started and how often your child has been having them as a first step in making a diagnosis. Diagnosis of childhood stomach cancer If your child has symptoms that suggest stomach cancer, the doctor will need to find out if they are due to cancer or another condition. The doctor will ask about your child’s personal and family medical history and do a physical exam. Depending on these results, they may recommend tests to find out if your child has stomach cancer. The following tests and procedures are used to diagnose stomach cancer. The results will also help you and your child’s doctor plan treatment. Computed tomography (CT) scan. The child lies on a table that slides through the CT scanner, which takes a series of detailed x-ray pictures of areas inside the body. A CT scan uses a computer linked to an x-ray machine to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body from different angles. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. To learn more, see Computed Tomography (CT) Scans and Cancer. Upper endoscopy is a procedure to look inside the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum (first part of the small intestine) to check for abnormal areas. An endoscope is passed through the mouth and down the throat into the esophagus. An endoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a tool to remove tissue or lymph node samples (biopsy), which are checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. The sample of tissue may be used for biomarker testing. Talk with your child's doctor about what to expect during and after your child's biopsy. To learn about the type of information that can be found in a pathologist's report about the cells or tissue removed during a biopsy, see Pathology Reports. Barium swallow is a series of x-rays of the esophagus and stomach. The patient drinks a liquid that contains barium (a silver-white metallic compound). The liquid coats the esophagus and stomach, and x-rays are taken. This procedure is also called an upper GI series. Getting a second opinion You may want to get a second opinion to confirm your child’s stomach cancer diagnosis and treatment plan. If you seek a second opinion, you will need to get important medical test results and reports from the first doctor to share with the second doctor. The second doctor will review the pathology report, slides, and scans before giving a recommendation. The doctor who gives the second opinion may agree with the first doctor, suggest changes or another approach, or provide more information about your child’s cancer. To learn more about choosing a doctor and getting a second opinion, see Finding Health Care Services. You can contact NCI’s Cancer Information Service via chat, email, or phone (both in English and Spanish) for help finding a doctor or hospital that can provide a second opinion. For questions you might want to ask at your appointments, see Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer. Prognostic factors for childhood stomach cancer If your child has been diagnosed with stomach cancer, you may have questions about how serious the cancer is and your child’s chances of survival. The likely outcome or course of a disease is called prognosis. The prognosis can be affected by whether the cancer has spread to other parts of the body at the time of diagnosis and how well the cancer responds to treatment. Your child’s oncology care team is in the best position to talk with you about your child’s prognosis. Stages of childhood stomach cancer Cancer stage describes the extent of cancer in the body, such as the size of the tumor, whether it has spread, and how far it has spread from where it first formed. There is no staging system used for childhood stomach cancer, but the tests and procedures done to diagnose the cancer are also used to help plan treatment. Types of treatment for childhood stomach cancer There are different types of treatment for children and adolescents with stomach cancer. You and your child’s cancer care team will work together to decide treatment. Many factors will be considered, such as your child’s overall health and whether the cancer is newly diagnosed or has come back. A pediatric oncologist, a doctor who specializes in treating children with cancer, will oversee treatment. The pediatric oncologist works with other pediatric health professionals who are experts in treating children with cancer and who specialize in certain areas of medicine. This may include the following specialists and others: pediatrician  pediatric gastroenterologist  pediatric surgeon  radiation oncologist  pathologist  pediatric nurse specialist  social worker  rehabilitation specialist  psychologist  child-life specialist  fertility specialist  Your child’s treatment plan will include information about the cancer, the goals of treatment, treatment options, and the possible side effects. It will be helpful to talk with your child’s cancer care team before treatment begins about what to expect. For help every step of the way, see our downloadable booklet, Children with Cancer: A Guide for Parents. Surgery to remove the tumor is the main treatment for stomach cancer. Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. Stomach cancer is sometimes treated with external beam radiation therapy. This type of radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the area of the body with cancer. Radiation therapy may be given alone or with other treatments, such as chemotherapy. To learn more, see External Beam Radiation Therapy for Cancer and Radiation Therapy Side Effects. Chemotherapy (also called chemo) uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. Chemotherapy may be given alone or with other types of treatment, such as radiation therapy. For stomach cancer, the chemotherapy is injected into a vein. When given this way, the drugs enter the bloodstream to reach cancer cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy drugs used to treat stomach cancer in children are cisplatin  doxorubicin  etoposide  fluorouracil (5-FU)  irinotecan  mitomycin C  nitrosoureas  Combinations of these drugs may be used. Other chemotherapy drugs not listed here may also be used. To learn more about how chemotherapy works, how it is given, common side effects, and more, see Chemotherapy to Treat Cancer. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. Because cancer in children is rare, taking part in a clinical trial should be considered. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. To learn more, see Clinical Trials Information for Patients and Caregivers. Treatment of childhood stomach cancer Treatment of newly diagnosed stomach cancer in children may include: surgery to remove the cancer and some healthy tissue around it  surgery to remove as much of the cancer as possible, followed by radiation therapy and chemotherapy  If your child's cancer comes back after treatment, their doctor will talk with you about what to expect and next steps. There might be treatment options that may shrink the cancer or control its growth. If there are no treatments, your child can receive care to control symptoms from cancer so they can be as comfortable as possible. Side effects of treatment To learn more about side effects that begin during treatment for cancer, see Side Effects. Side effects from cancer treatment that begin after treatment and continue for months or years are called late effects. Late effects of cancer treatment may include the following: physical problems  changes in mood, feelings, thinking, learning, or memory  second cancers (new types of cancer) or other conditions  Some late effects may be treated or controlled. It is important to talk with your child's doctors about the possible late effects caused by some treatments. Learn more about Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. Follow-up testing Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer may be repeated to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your child's condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Coping with cancer When your child has cancer, every member of the family needs support. Honest and calm conversations build trust as you talk with your child and their siblings. Taking care of yourself during this difficult time is also important. Reach out to your child’s treatment team and to people in your family and community for support. To learn more, see Support for Families When a Child Has Cancer and the booklet Children with Cancer: A Guide for Parents.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Study Suggests New Treatment Option for Some Lymphomas - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/lymphoma/research/bendamustine-rituximab
txt: Updated findings from a large European clinical trial indicate that patients with some types of lymphoma could initially be treated with the chemotherapy drug bendamustine (Treanda®) and the targeted agent rituximab (Rituxan®). The majority of patients in the trial had follicular lymphoma, and the remainder had either mantle cell or indolent (slow-growing) lymphoma. Findings from the trial, which involved 514 newly diagnosed patients, were reported by lead investigator Mathias J. Rummel, M.D., Ph.D., of the University Hospital Giessen in Germany at the 2012 American Society of Clinical Oncology annual meeting. After a median follow-up of nearly 4 years, patients who received the two-drug combination lived more than twice as long without their disease progressing (69.5 months versus 31.2 months) as patients who received the standard first-line treatment, rituximab and a chemotherapy regimen called CHOP, or R-CHOP. Despite the improvement in progression-free survival in patients treated with bendamustine and rituximab, overall survival did not differ between the two patient groups. As a result, some researchers may hesitate to promote the drug combination as the new standard of care for all patients with these lymphomas, according to Wyndham Wilson, M.D., Ph.D., head of the Lymphoma Therapeutics Section in NCI’s Center for Cancer Research, who was not involved in the study. Although there was a higher incidence of mild skin reactions in patients who received bendamustine and rituximab, other major side effects were far less common, including neuropathy and the dangerous drops in white blood cell count known as neutropenia. Only 4 percent of patients who received bendamustine and rituximab required treatment with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor to counter neutropenia compared with 20 percent of patients who received R-CHOP. Dr. Rummel cited several reasons why the bendamustine-containing combination did not lead to improved overall survival: First, almost half of the patients whose cancer progressed after R-CHOP crossed over to treatment with bendamustine and rituximab. Second, these types of lymphoma grow slowly and tend to have better long-term survival, so patients would need to be followed for a longer time before a difference in overall survival might be seen. Bendamustine, which was developed in Germany and has been used in Europe for decades to treat blood cancers, is approved in the United States for the treatment of indolent lymphoma, but only for cancers that have progressed following treatment with a regimen that includes rituximab. Bendamustine is also approved for the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Childhood Gastrointestinal Neuroendocrine Tumors Treatment - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/gi-neuroendocrine-tumors/patient/child-gi-neuroendocrine-treatment-pdq
txt:  General Information About Childhood Gastrointestinal Neuroendocrine Tumors  Stages of Gastrointestinal Neuroendocrine Tumors  Treatment Option Overview  Treatment of Gastrointestinal Neuroendocrine Tumors  Treatment of Recurrent Gastrointestinal Neuroendocrine Tumors  To Learn More About Gastrointestinal Neuroendocrine Tumors  About This PDQ Summary  A gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumor forms in neuroendocrine cells in the lining of the digestive tract, appendix, and other organs in the abdomen. Signs and symptoms of gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors  depend on where the tumor forms. Tests that examine the digestive tract, liver, and pancreas are used to diagnose gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors. Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery). Gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors (also called gastrointestinal carcinoid tumors) form from a certain type of   neuroendocrine cell (a type of cell that is like a nerve cell and a hormone-making cell).  These cells  are scattered throughout the chest and abdomen, but most are found in certain organs in the abdomen.  Neuroendocrine cells in the digestive tract make hormones that help control digestive juices and the muscles used in moving food through the stomach and intestines. Most gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors in children form in the appendix (a pouch that sticks out from the first part of the large intestine near the end of the small intestine). The tumor is often found during surgery to remove the appendix. They also form in the digestive tract (lining of the stomach or intestines), pancreas, and liver. These tumors are usually small, slow-growing, and  benign (not cancer). Some tumors may be malignant (cancer) and spread to other places in the body. Check with your child's doctor if you are concerned about signs and symptoms that may be caused by gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors or by other conditions. Neuroendocrine tumors in the appendix may cause the following signs and symptoms: Abdominal pain, especially on the lower right side of the abdomen. Fever. Nausea and vomiting. Diarrhea. Gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors that are not in the appendix may release hormones and other substances. Carcinoid syndrome occurs when a neuroendocrine tumor in the digestive tract releases the hormone serotonin and other substances. It may cause any of the following signs and symptoms. Check with your child’s doctor if your child has any of the following: Redness and a warm feeling in the face, neck, and upper chest. A fast heartbeat. Trouble breathing. Sudden drop in blood pressure (restlessness, confusion, weakness, dizziness, and pale, cool, and clammy skin). Diarrhea. The following tests and procedures may be used: Physical exam and health history: An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patient’s health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. Blood chemistry studies: A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet and radio waves to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body.  The pictures are made by a computer.  This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI).EnlargeMagnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan. The child lies on a table that slides into the MRI machine, which takes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. The positioning of the child on the table depends on the part of the body being imaged. PET scan (positron emission tomography scan): A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body.  A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein.  The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body.  Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do.EnlargePositron emission tomography (PET) scan. The child lies on a table that slides through the PET scanner. The head rest and white strap help the child lie still.  A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into the child's vein, and a scanner makes a picture of where the glucose is being used in the body.  Cancer cells show up brighter in the picture because they take up more glucose than normal cells do. CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles.  The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine.  This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography.EnlargeComputed tomography (CT) scan. The child lies on a table that slides through the CT scanner, which takes a series of detailed x-ray pictures of areas inside the body. Ultrasound exam: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes.  The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. The picture can be printed to be looked at later.EnlargeAbdominal ultrasound. An ultrasound transducer connected to a computer is pressed against the skin of the abdomen. The transducer bounces sound waves off internal organs and tissues to make echoes that form a sonogram (computer picture). Twenty-four-hour urine test: A test in which urine is collected for 24 hours to measure the amounts of certain substances, such as hormones. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease in the organ or tissue that makes it. The urine sample is checked to see if it contains 5-HIAA (a breakdown product of the hormone serotonin which may be made by neuroendocrine tumors). This test is used to help diagnose carcinoid syndrome. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy: A type of radionuclide scan that may be used to find tumors. A very small amount of radioactive octreotide (a hormone that attaches to tumors) is injected into a vein and travels through the blood. The radioactive octreotide attaches to the tumor and a special camera that detects radioactivity is used to show where the tumors are in the body. This procedure is also called octreotide scan and SRS. Prognosis depends on the following: Where the tumor first formed in the body. The size of the tumor. Whether the tumor has spread to other parts of the body. Whether the tumor is newly diagnosed or has recurred (come back). The prognosis for neuroendocrine tumors in the appendix in children is usually excellent after surgery to remove the tumor. Gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors that are not in the appendix are usually larger or have spread to other parts of the body at the time of diagnosis and do not respond well to chemotherapy. Larger tumors are more likely to recur (come back). After a gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumor has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread to nearby areas or to other parts of the body. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer has spread to nearby areas or other parts of the body is called staging. There is no standard staging system for childhood gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors. Neuroendocrine tumors of the appendix are not known to spread, but other gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors may spread. The results of tests and procedures done to diagnose gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors are used to help make decisions about treatment. Sometimes childhood gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors recur (come back) after treatment. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if  neuroendocrine tumor cells in the small intestine spread to the liver, the cancer cells in the liver are actually neuroendocrine tumor cells. The cells in the liver are metastatic neuroendocrine tumor cells, not liver cancer. There are different types of treatment for children with gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors. Children with gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors not in the appendix should have their treatment planned by a team of doctors who are experts in treating childhood cancer. Five types of standard treatment are used:SurgeryEmbolizationHormone therapyPeptide receptor radionuclide therapyTargeted therapy New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Treatment of gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors may cause side effects. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Follow-up tests may be needed. Surgery Embolization Hormone therapy Peptide receptor radionuclide therapy Targeted therapy Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials.  A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the  standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Because cancer in children is rare, taking part in a clinical trial should be considered.  Some clinical trials are open only to patients  who have not started treatment. Treatment will be overseen by a pediatric oncologist, a doctor who specializes in treating children with cancer. The pediatric oncologist works with other pediatric health professionals who are experts in treating children with cancer and who specialize in certain areas of medicine. This may include the following specialists and others: Pediatrician. Pediatric surgeon. Pathologist. Pediatric endocrinologist. Pediatric nurse specialist. Social worker. Rehabilitation specialist. Psychologist. Child-life specialist. Surgery to remove the tumor is the only treatment needed for neuroendocrine tumors in the appendix. Embolization is a treatment in which contrast dye and particles are injected into the hepatic artery through a catheter (thin tube). The particles block the artery, cutting off blood flow to the tumor. Sometimes a small amount of a radioactive substance is attached to the particles. Most of the radiation is trapped near the tumor to kill the cancer cells. This is called radioembolization. Hormone therapy with a somatostatin analogue (octreotide or lanreotide) may be used to treat gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors that have spread or cannot be removed by surgery. This treatment stops extra hormones from being made by the neuroendocrine tumor. Octreotide or lanreotide are somatostatin analogues which are injected under the skin or into the muscle. Sometimes a small amount of a radioactive substance is attached to the somatostatin analogue drugs octreotide or lanreotide to kill the cancer cells. Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells. Targeted therapies usually cause less harm to normal cells than chemotherapy or radiation therapy do. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors: These targeted therapy drugs block signals needed for tumors to grow. Sunitinib is used to treat gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors that are not in the appendix. mTOR inhibitors: A type of targeted therapy that stops the protein that helps cells divide and survive. Everolimus is used to treat gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors that are not in the appendix. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. To learn more about side effects that begin during treatment for cancer, visit Side Effects. Side effects from cancer treatment that begin after treatment and continue for months or years are called late effects. Late effects of cancer treatment may include: Physical problems. Changes in mood, feelings, thinking, learning, or memory. Second cancers (new types of cancer) or other conditions. Some late effects may be treated or controlled. It is important to talk with your child's doctors about the possible late effects caused by some treatments. See the PDQ summary on Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer for more information. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer  treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first  to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. As your child goes through treatment, they will have follow-up tests or checkups. Some tests that were done to diagnose or stage the cancer may be repeated to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your child's condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview  section. Treatment of newly diagnosed neuroendocrine tumors in the appendix in children may include the following: Surgery to remove  the appendix. Treatment of newly diagnosed neuroendocrine tumors in the large intestine, pancreas, or stomach is usually surgery. Treatment of newly diagnosed tumors that cannot be removed by surgery, multiple tumors, or tumors that have spread may include the following: Embolization. Hormone therapy with a somatostatin analogue (octreotide or lanreotide). Peptide receptor radionuclide therapy. Targeted therapy with a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (sunitinib) or an mTOR inhibitor (everolimus). Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatment listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview  section. Treatment of recurrent gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors in children may include the following: A clinical trial that checks a sample of the patient's tumor for certain gene changes. The type of targeted therapy that will be given to the patient depends on the type of gene change. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For more information from the National Cancer Institute about gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors, see the following: Gastrointestinal Carcinoid Tumors Home Page Computed Tomography (CT) Scans and Cancer Targeted Cancer Therapies For more childhood cancer information and other general cancer resources, visit: About Cancer Childhood Cancers CureSearch for Children's Cancer Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer Adolescents and Young Adults with Cancer Children with Cancer: A Guide for Parents Cancer in Children and Adolescents Staging Coping with Cancer Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer For Survivors and Caregivers Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish. PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the treatment of childhood gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board. A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Childhood Gastrointestinal Neuroendocrine Tumors Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/gi-neuroendocrine-tumors/patient/child-gi-neuroendocrine-treatment-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online. Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Prostate Cancer Treatment (PDQ®) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/prostate/hp/prostate-treatment-pdq
txt:  General Information About Prostate Cancer  Stage Information for Prostate Cancer  Treatment Option Overview for Prostate Cancer  Treatment of Stage I Prostate Cancer  Treatment of Stage II Prostate Cancer  Treatment of Stage III Prostate Cancer  Treatment of Stage IV Prostate Cancer  Treatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer  Key References for Prostate Cancer  Latest Updates to This Summary (03/11/2024)  About This PDQ Summary  Incidence and Mortality Anatomy Screening Pathology Gleason scoreMolecular markers Clinical Presentation Diagnostic Evaluation Prognostic FactorsExtent of tumor Histological grade of tumor Patient's age and health Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level Serum acid phosphatase levelsUse of nomograms as a prognostic tool Follow-Up After Treatment Follow-up after radical prostatectomyFollow-up after radiation therapyFollow-up after hormonal therapy Gleason score Molecular markers Extent of tumor Histological grade of tumor Patient's age and health Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level Serum acid phosphatase levels Use of nomograms as a prognostic tool Follow-up after radical prostatectomy Follow-up after radiation therapy Follow-up after hormonal therapy The  median age at diagnosis of prostate cancer is 67 years.[1]   Prostate cancer may be cured when localized, and it frequently responds to treatment when widespread. The rate of tumor growth varies from very slow to moderately rapid, and some patients may have prolonged survival even after the cancer has metastasized to distant sites, such as bone. The 5-year relative survival rate for men diagnosed in the United States from 2013 to 2019 with local or regional disease was greater than 99%, and  the rate for distant disease was 34%; a 97% survival rate was observed for all stages combined.[2] The approach to treatment is influenced by age and coexisting medical problems. Side effects of various forms of treatment should be considered in selecting appropriate management. Many patients—especially those with localized tumors—may die of other illnesses without ever having suffered disability from prostate cancer, even if managed conservatively without an attempt at curative therapy.[3,4]  In part, these favorable outcomes are likely the result of  widespread screening  with the  prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test, which can identify patients with  asymptomatic tumors that have little or no lethal potential.[5] There is a large number  of these clinically indolent tumors, estimated  to range from 30% to 70% of men older than  60 years, based on autopsy series of men dying of causes unrelated to prostate cancer.[6,7] Because diagnostic methods have changed over time, any analysis of survival after treatment of prostate cancer and comparison of the various treatment strategies is complicated by evidence of increasing diagnosis of nonlethal tumors. Nonrandomized comparisons of treatments may be confounded not only by patient selection factors but also by time trends. For example, a population-based study in Sweden showed that, from 1960 to the late 1980s, before the use of PSA for screening purposes, long-term relative survival rates after the diagnosis of prostate cancer improved substantially as more sensitive methods of diagnosis were introduced. This occurred despite the use of watchful waiting or active surveillance or palliative hormonal treatment as the most common treatment strategies for localized prostate cancer during the entire era (<150 radical prostatectomies per year were performed in Sweden during the late 1980s). The investigators estimated that, if all prostate cancers diagnosed between 1960 and 1964 were of the lethal variety, then at least 33% of cancers diagnosed between 1980 and 1984 were of the nonlethal variety.[8][Level of evidence C1]  With the advent of PSA screening as the most common method of detection in the United States, the ability to diagnose nonlethal prostate cancers has further increased. Another issue complicating comparisons of outcomes among nonconcurrent series of patients is the possibility of changes in criteria for the histological diagnosis of prostate cancer.[9] This phenomenon creates a statistical artifact that can produce a false sense of therapeutic accomplishment and may also lead to more aggressive therapy. Controversy exists about the value of screening, the most appropriate staging evaluation, and the optimal treatment of each stage of the disease.[10-14] Estimated new cases and deaths from prostate cancer in the United States in 2024:[2][Cancer Stat Facts: Prostate Cancer] New cases: 299,010. Deaths: 35,250. EnlargeFigure 1.  Anatomy of the male reproductive and urinary systems. Screening for prostate cancer is controversial. In the United States, most prostate cancers are diagnosed because of screening, either with a PSA blood test or, less frequently, with a  digital rectal examination. Randomized trials have yielded conflicting results.[15-17]  Systematic literature reviews and meta-analyses have reported no clear evidence that screening for  prostate cancer decreases the risk of death from prostate cancer, or that the  benefits outweigh the harms of screening.[18,19] For a detailed summary of evidence regarding the benefits and harms of screening for prostate cancer, see Prostate Cancer Screening. More than 95% of primary prostate cancers are adenocarcinomas. Prostate adenocarcinomas are frequently multifocal and heterogeneous in patterns of differentiation.  Prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) (noninvasive atypical epithelial cells within benign-appearing acini) is often present in association with prostatic adenocarcinoma. PIN is subdivided into low grade and high grade. The high-grade form may be a precursor of adenocarcinoma.[20] Several rare tumors account for the rest of the cases.  These include the following: Small-cell tumors. Intralobular acinar carcinomas. Ductal carcinomas. Clear cell carcinomas. Mucinous carcinomas.[21] The histological grade of prostate adenocarcinomas is usually reported according to one of the variations of the Gleason scoring system, which provides a useful, albeit crude, adjunct to tumor staging in determining  prognosis.[21]   The Gleason score is calculated based on the dominant histological grades, from grade 1 (well differentiated) to grade 5 (very poorly differentiated).  The classical score is derived by adding the two most prevalent pattern grades, yielding a score ranging from 2 to 10.  Because there is some evidence that the least-differentiated component of the specimen may provide independent prognostic information, the score is often provided by its separate components (e.g., Gleason score 3 + 4 = 7; or 4 + 3 = 7).[22] There is evidence that, over time, pathologists have tended to award higher Gleason scores to the same histological patterns, a phenomenon sometimes termed grade inflation.[23,24]  This phenomenon complicates comparisons of outcomes in current versus historical patient series. For example, prostate biopsies from a population-based cohort of 1,858 men diagnosed with prostate cancer from 1990 through 1992 were re-read in 2002 to 2004.[23,24]  The contemporary Gleason score readings were an average of 0.85 points higher (95% confidence interval, 0.79–0.91; P < .001) than the same slides read a decade earlier.  As a result, Gleason-score standardized prostate cancer mortality rates for these men were artifactually improved from 2.08 to 1.50 deaths per 100-person years—a 28% decrease even though overall outcomes were unchanged. A number of tumor markers are associated with the outcome of patients with prostate cancer, including the following:[20,21] Markers of apoptosis including Bcl-2, Bax. Markers of proliferation rate, such as Ki67. TP53 mutation or expression. p27. E-cadherin. Microvessel density. DNA ploidy. p16. PTEN gene hypermethylation and allelic losses. However, none of these has been prospectively validated, and they are not a part of the routine management of patients. In the United States, most prostate cancers are diagnosed as a result of screening; therefore, symptoms of cancer are infrequent at the time of diagnosis.[21] Nevertheless, local growth of the tumor may produce symptoms of urinary obstruction such as: Decreased urinary stream. Urgency. Hesitancy. Nocturia. Incomplete bladder emptying. These symptoms are nonspecific and more indicative of benign prostatic hyperplasia than cancer. Although rare in the current era of widespread screening, prostate cancer may also present with symptoms of metastases, including bone pain, pathological fractures, or symptoms caused by bone marrow involvement. Needle biopsy is the most common method used to diagnose prostate cancer.  Most urologists now perform a transrectal biopsy using a bioptic gun with ultrasound guidance.  Less frequently, a transperineal  ultrasound-guided approach can be used in patients who may be at increased risk of complications from a transrectal approach.[25] Over the years, there has been a trend toward taking eight to ten or more biopsy samples from several areas of the prostate with a consequent increased yield of cancer detection after an elevated PSA blood test.[21] The use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)−directed biopsy in the initial diagnostic evaluation of prostate cancer is also being studied, either as a replacement for, or in addition to, standard systematic prostate needle biopsies.  The data have been reported primarily by experienced MRI radiologists and urologists in referral centers, and generalizability of results is uncertain. A multicenter randomized trial of 500 patients has shown that, in experienced hands, a multiparametric MRI-directed biopsy is more accurate than a transrectal-guided biopsy to detect clinically significant cancers. MRI led to the detection of more Gleason score (≥7) lesions and fewer Gleason score (<7) lesions, with fewer biopsies overall.[26] The data suggested that MRI-directed biopsy can replace standard transrectal-guided biopsies.  However, a large, single-arm, single-center study of 2,103 men with MRI-visible lesions who underwent both MRI-directed biopsies and standard systematic prostate needle biopsies under ultrasound visualization suggested otherwise.[27] In that study, MRI-directed biopsies alone led to misclassification of 8.8% of cancers defined as clinically significant (Gleason score 4 + 3 or higher) compared with the combination of both biopsy techniques.  Both studies reported only on histology end points at the time of diagnosis, rather than health outcomes on follow-up. Prophylactic antibiotics, especially fluoroquinolones, are often used before transrectal needle biopsies. There are reports of increasing rates of sepsis, particularly with fluoroquinolone-resistant E. coli, and hospitalization after the procedure.[28,29]  Therefore, men undergoing transrectal biopsy should be told to seek medical attention immediately if they experience fever after biopsy. The following factors influence the survival of patients with prostate cancer:[30-34] Extent of tumor. Histological grade of tumor. Patient's age and health. Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level. For more information on survival rates, see  Cancer Stat Facts: Prostate Cancer. When the cancer is confined to the prostate gland, long-term prognosis is excellent.  Patients with locally advanced cancer
are not usually curable, but 5-year survival is still very good.  If prostate
cancer has spread to distant organs, current therapy will not cure it.  Median
survival is usually 1 to 3 years, and most of these  patients will die of
prostate cancer.  Even in this group of patients, indolent clinical
courses lasting for many years may be observed. Poorly differentiated tumors are more likely to have metastasized before diagnosis and are associated with a poorer prognosis. The most commonly used method to report tumor differentiation is the Gleason score. For more information, see  the Pathology section. Any benefits of definitive local therapy with curative intent may take years to emerge.  Therefore, therapy with curative intent is usually reserved for men with a sufficiently long life expectancy.  For example, radical prostatectomy is often reserved for men with an estimated life expectancy of at least 10 years. PSA, an organ-specific marker, is often used as a tumor
marker.[32,33,35-40] The higher the level of PSA at baseline, the higher the risk of metastatic disease or subsequent disease progression. However, it is an imprecise marker of risk. For example, baseline PSA and rate of PSA change were associated with subsequent metastasis or prostate cancer death in a cohort of 267  men with clinically localized prostate cancer who were managed by watchful waiting or active surveillance in the control arm of a randomized trial comparing radical prostatectomy with watchful waiting or active surveillance.[41,42] Nevertheless, the accuracy of classifying men into groups whose cancer remained indolent versus those whose cancer progressed was poor at all examined cut points of PSA or PSA rate of change. Elevations of serum acid phosphatase are associated with poor prognosis in both localized and disseminated disease. However, serum acid phosphatase levels are not incorporated into the American Joint Committee on Cancer's (AJCC) staging system for prostate cancer.[35] Several nomograms have been developed to predict outcomes either before radical prostatectomy [43-46] or after radical prostatectomy [47,48] with intent to cure.  Preoperative nomograms are based on clinical stage, PSA level, Gleason score, and the number of positive and negative prostate biopsy cores.  One independently validated nomogram demonstrated increased accuracy in predicting biochemical recurrence-free survival by including preoperative plasma levels of transforming growth factor B1 and interleukin-6 soluble receptor.[49,50] Postoperative nomograms add pathological findings, such as capsular invasion, surgical margins, seminal vesicle invasion, and lymph node involvement.   The nomograms, however,  were developed at academic centers and may not be as accurate when generalized to nonacademic hospitals, where most patients are treated.[51,52]  In addition, the nomograms use nonhealth (intermediate) outcomes, such as PSA rise or pathological surgical findings, and subjective end points, such as the physician's perceived need for additional therapy.  In addition, the nomograms may be affected by changing methods of diagnosis or neoadjuvant therapy.[44] The optimal follow-up strategy for men treated for prostate cancer is uncertain.  Men should be interviewed and examined for symptoms or signs of recurrent or progressing disease, as well as side effects of therapy that can be managed by changes in therapy.  However, using surrogate end points for clinical decision-making is controversial, and the evidence that changing therapy based on such end points translates into clinical benefit is weak. Often, rates of PSA change are thought to be markers of tumor progression. However, even though a tumor marker or characteristic may be consistently associated with a high risk of prostate cancer progression or death, it may be a very poor predictor and of very limited utility in making therapeutic decisions. Although the PSA test is nearly universally used to follow patients, the diversity of recommendations on the provision of follow-up care reflects the current lack of research evidence on which to base firm conclusions. A systematic review of international guidelines highlights the need for robust primary research to inform future evidence-based models of follow-up care for men with prostate cancer.[53] Preliminary data from a retrospective cohort of 8,669 patients with clinically localized prostate cancer treated with either radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy suggested that short posttreatment PSA doubling time (<3 months in this study) fulfills some criteria as a surrogate end point for all-cause mortality and prostate cancer-specific mortality after surgery or radiation therapy.[54] Likewise, a retrospective analysis (SWOG-S9916 [NCT00004001]) showed  PSA declines of 20% to 40% (but not 50%) at 3 months and 30% or more at 2 months after initiation of chemotherapy for hormone-independent prostate cancer, and  fulfilled several criteria of surrogacy for overall survival (OS).[55] These observations should be independently confirmed in prospective study designs and may not apply to patients treated with hormonal therapy. In addition, there are no standardized criteria of surrogacy or standardized cut points for adequacy of surrogate end points, even in prospective trials.[56] After radical prostatectomy, a detectable PSA level identifies patients at elevated risk of local treatment failure or metastatic disease;[37] however, a substantial proportion of patients with an elevated or rising PSA level after surgery remain clinically free of symptoms for extended periods.[57] Biochemical evidence of failure on the basis of elevated or slowly rising PSA alone, therefore, may not be sufficient to initiate additional treatment. For example, in a retrospective analysis of nearly 2,000 men who had undergone radical prostatectomy with curative intent and were followed for a mean of 5.3 years, 315 men (15%) demonstrated an abnormal PSA of 0.2 ng/mL  or higher, which is considered evidence of biochemical recurrence.  Among these 315 men, 103 (34%) developed clinical evidence of recurrence.  The median time to the development of clinical metastasis after biochemical recurrence was 8 years. After the men developed metastatic disease, the median time to death was an additional 5 years.[58] For patients treated with radiation therapy, the combination of clinical tumor stage, Gleason score, and pretreatment PSA level is often used to estimate the risk of relapse.[59][Level of evidence C2]  As is the case after prostatectomy, PSA is often followed for signs of tumor recurrence after radiation therapy.  After radiation therapy with curative intent, persistently elevated or rising PSA may be a prognostic factor for clinical disease recurrence; however, reported case series have used a variety of definitions of PSA failure. Criteria have been developed by the American Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology Consensus Panel.[60,61] It is difficult to base decisions about initiating additional therapy on biochemical failure alone. The implication of the various definitions of PSA failure for OS is not known, and, as in the surgical series, many biochemical relapses (rising PSA only) may not be clinically manifested in patients treated with radiation therapy.[62,63] After hormonal therapy, reduction of PSA to undetectable levels provides information regarding the duration of progression-free status; however, decreases in PSA of less than 80% may not be very predictive.[32] Because PSA expression itself is under hormonal control, androgen deprivation therapy can decrease the serum level of PSA independent of tumor response. Clinicians, therefore, cannot rely solely on the serum PSA level to monitor a patient’s response to hormonal therapy; they must also follow clinical criteria.[64] National Cancer Institute: SEER Stat Fact Sheets: Prostate. Bethesda, Md: National Cancer Institute. Available online. Last accessed March 11, 2024. American Cancer Society: Cancer Facts and Figures 2024. American Cancer Society, 2024. Available online. Last accessed January 17, 2024. Lu-Yao GL, Albertsen PC, Moore DF, et al.: Outcomes of localized prostate cancer following conservative management. JAMA 302 (11): 1202-9, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Albertsen PC, Moore DF, Shih W, et al.: Impact of comorbidity on survival among men with localized prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 29 (10): 1335-41, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Welch HG, Albertsen PC: Prostate cancer diagnosis and treatment after the introduction of prostate-specific antigen screening: 1986-2005. J Natl Cancer Inst 101 (19): 1325-9, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Welch HG, Black WC: Overdiagnosis in cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 102 (9): 605-13, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Zlotta AR, Egawa S, Pushkar D, et al.: Prevalence of prostate cancer on autopsy: cross-sectional study on unscreened Caucasian and Asian men. J Natl Cancer Inst 105 (14): 1050-8, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Helgesen F, Holmberg L, Johansson JE, et al.: Trends in prostate cancer survival in Sweden, 1960 through 1988: evidence of increasing diagnosis of nonlethal tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst 88 (17): 1216-21, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Berner A, Harvei S, Skjorten FJ: Follow-up of localized prostate cancer, with emphasis on previous undiagnosed incidental cancer. BJU Int 83 (1): 47-52, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Garnick MB: Prostate cancer: screening, diagnosis, and management. Ann Intern Med 118 (10): 804-18, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Croswell JM, Kramer BS, Crawford ED: Screening for prostate cancer with PSA testing: current status and future directions. Oncology (Williston Park) 25 (6): 452-60, 463, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Bill-Axelson A, Holmberg L, Ruutu M, et al.: Radical prostatectomy versus watchful waiting in early prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 352 (19): 1977-84, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Wilt TJ, Brawer MK, Jones KM, et al.: Radical prostatectomy versus observation for localized prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 367 (3): 203-13, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Hegarty J, Beirne PV, Walsh E, et al.: Radical prostatectomy versus watchful waiting for prostate cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev  (11): CD006590, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Andriole GL, Grubb RL, Buys SS, et al.: Mortality results from a randomized prostate-cancer screening trial. N Engl J Med 360 (13): 1310-9, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Schröder FH, Hugosson J, Roobol MJ, et al.: Screening and prostate-cancer mortality in a randomized European study. N Engl J Med 360 (13): 1320-8, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Sandblom G, Varenhorst E, Rosell J, et al.: Randomised prostate cancer screening trial: 20 year follow-up. BMJ 342: d1539, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Djulbegovic M, Beyth RJ, Neuberger MM, et al.: Screening for prostate cancer: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ 341: c4543, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Ilic D, O'Connor D, Green S, et al.: Screening for prostate cancer: an updated Cochrane systematic review. BJU Int 107 (6): 882-91, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Nelson WG, De Marzo AM, Isaacs WB: Prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 349 (4): 366-81, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Zelefsky MJ, Eastham JA, Sartor AO: Cancer of the prostate. In: DeVita VT Jr, Lawrence TS, Rosenberg SA: Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology. 9th ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2011, pp 1220-71. Chan TY, Partin AW, Walsh PC, et al.: Prognostic significance of Gleason score 3+4 versus Gleason score 4+3 tumor at radical prostatectomy. Urology 56 (5): 823-7, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Albertsen PC, Hanley JA, Barrows GH, et al.: Prostate cancer and the Will Rogers phenomenon. J Natl Cancer Inst 97 (17): 1248-53, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Thompson IM, Canby-Hagino E, Lucia MS: Stage migration and grade inflation in prostate cancer: Will Rogers meets Garrison Keillor. J Natl Cancer Inst 97 (17): 1236-7, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Webb JA, Shanmuganathan K, McLean A: Complications of ultrasound-guided transperineal prostate biopsy. A prospective study. Br J Urol 72 (5 Pt 2): 775-7, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Kasivisvanathan V, Rannikko AS, Borghi M, et al.: MRI-Targeted or Standard Biopsy for Prostate-Cancer Diagnosis. N Engl J Med 378 (19): 1767-1777, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Ahdoot M, Wilbur AR, Reese SE, et al.: MRI-Targeted, Systematic, and Combined Biopsy for Prostate Cancer Diagnosis. N Engl J Med 382 (10): 917-928, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] Nam RK, Saskin R, Lee Y, et al.: Increasing hospital admission rates for urological complications after transrectal ultrasound guided prostate biopsy. J Urol 183 (3): 963-8, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Liss MA, Chang A, Santos R, et al.: Prevalence and significance of fluoroquinolone resistant Escherichia coli in patients undergoing transrectal ultrasound guided prostate needle biopsy. J Urol 185 (4): 1283-8, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Gittes RF: Carcinoma of the prostate. N Engl J Med 324 (4): 236-45, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Paulson DF, Moul JW, Walther PJ: Radical prostatectomy for clinical stage T1-2N0M0 prostatic adenocarcinoma: long-term results. J Urol 144 (5): 1180-4, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Matzkin H, Eber P, Todd B, et al.: Prognostic significance of changes in prostate-specific markers after endocrine treatment of stage D2 prostatic cancer. Cancer 70 (9): 2302-9, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Pisansky TM, Cha SS, Earle JD, et al.: Prostate-specific antigen as a pretherapy prognostic factor in patients treated with radiation therapy for clinically localized prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 11 (11): 2158-66, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Chodak GW, Thisted RA, Gerber GS, et al.: Results of conservative management of clinically localized prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 330 (4): 242-8, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Carlton JC, Zagars GK, Oswald MJ: The role of serum prostatic acid phosphatase in the management of adenocarcinoma of the prostate with radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 19 (6): 1383-8, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Stamey TA, Yang N, Hay AR, et al.: Prostate-specific antigen as a serum marker for adenocarcinoma of the prostate. N Engl J Med 317 (15): 909-16, 1987. [PUBMED Abstract] Stamey TA, Kabalin JN: Prostate specific antigen in the diagnosis and treatment of adenocarcinoma of the prostate. I. Untreated patients. J Urol 141 (5): 1070-5, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Stamey TA, Kabalin JN, McNeal JE, et al.: Prostate specific antigen in the diagnosis and treatment of adenocarcinoma of the prostate. II. Radical prostatectomy treated patients. J Urol 141 (5): 1076-83, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Stamey TA, Kabalin JN, Ferrari M: Prostate specific antigen in the diagnosis and treatment of adenocarcinoma of the prostate. III. Radiation treated patients. J Urol 141 (5): 1084-7, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Andriole GL: Serum prostate-specific antigen: the most useful tumor marker. J Clin Oncol 10 (8): 1205-7, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Fall K, Garmo H, Andrén O, et al.: Prostate-specific antigen levels as a predictor of lethal prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 99 (7): 526-32, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Parekh DJ, Ankerst DP, Thompson IM: Prostate-specific antigen levels, prostate-specific antigen kinetics, and prostate cancer prognosis: a tocsin calling for prospective studies. J Natl Cancer Inst 99 (7): 496-7, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Partin AW, Kattan MW, Subong EN, et al.: Combination of prostate-specific antigen, clinical stage, and Gleason score to predict pathological stage of localized prostate cancer. A multi-institutional update. JAMA 277 (18): 1445-51, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Partin AW, Mangold LA, Lamm DM, et al.: Contemporary update of prostate cancer staging nomograms (Partin Tables) for the new millennium. Urology 58 (6): 843-8, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Kattan MW, Eastham JA, Stapleton AM, et al.: A preoperative nomogram for disease recurrence following radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 90 (10): 766-71, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Stephenson AJ, Scardino PT, Eastham JA, et al.: Preoperative nomogram predicting the 10-year probability of prostate cancer recurrence after radical prostatectomy. J Natl Cancer Inst 98 (10): 715-7, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Kattan MW, Wheeler TM, Scardino PT: Postoperative nomogram for disease recurrence after radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 17 (5): 1499-507, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Stephenson AJ, Scardino PT, Eastham JA, et al.: Postoperative nomogram predicting the 10-year probability of prostate cancer recurrence after radical prostatectomy. J Clin Oncol 23 (28): 7005-12, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Shariat SF, Walz J, Roehrborn CG, et al.: External validation of a biomarker-based preoperative nomogram predicts biochemical recurrence after radical prostatectomy. J Clin Oncol 26 (9): 1526-31, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Kattan MW, Shariat SF, Andrews B, et al.: The addition of interleukin-6 soluble receptor and transforming growth factor beta1 improves a preoperative nomogram for predicting biochemical progression in patients with clinically localized prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 21 (19): 3573-9, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Penson DF, Grossfeld GD, Li YP, et al.: How well does the Partin nomogram predict pathological stage after radical prostatectomy in a community based population? Results of the cancer of the prostate strategic urological research endeavor. J Urol 167 (4): 1653-7; discussion 1657-8, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Greene KL, Meng MV, Elkin EP, et al.: Validation of the Kattan preoperative nomogram for prostate cancer recurrence using a community based cohort: results from cancer of the prostate strategic urological research endeavor (capsure). J Urol 171 (6 Pt 1): 2255-9, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] McIntosh HM, Neal RD, Rose P, et al.: Follow-up care for men with prostate cancer and the role of primary care: a systematic review of international guidelines. Br J Cancer 100 (12): 1852-60, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] D'Amico AV, Moul JW, Carroll PR, et al.: Surrogate end point for prostate cancer-specific mortality after radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy. J Natl Cancer Inst 95 (18): 1376-83, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Petrylak DP, Ankerst DP, Jiang CS, et al.: Evaluation of prostate-specific antigen declines for surrogacy in patients treated on SWOG 99-16. J Natl Cancer Inst 98 (8): 516-21, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Baker SG: Surrogate endpoints: wishful thinking or reality? J Natl Cancer Inst 98 (8): 502-3, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Frazier HA, Robertson JE, Humphrey PA, et al.: Is prostate specific antigen of clinical importance in evaluating outcome after radical prostatectomy. J Urol 149 (3): 516-8, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Pound CR, Partin AW, Eisenberger MA, et al.: Natural history of progression after PSA elevation following radical prostatectomy. JAMA 281 (17): 1591-7, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Pisansky TM, Kahn MJ, Rasp GM, et al.: A multiple prognostic index predictive of disease outcome after irradiation for clinically localized prostate carcinoma. Cancer 79 (2): 337-44, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Consensus statement: guidelines for PSA following radiation therapy. American Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology Consensus Panel. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 37 (5): 1035-41, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Roach M, Hanks G, Thames H, et al.: Defining biochemical failure following radiotherapy with or without hormonal therapy in men with clinically localized prostate cancer: recommendations of the RTOG-ASTRO Phoenix Consensus Conference. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 65 (4): 965-74, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Kuban DA, el-Mahdi AM, Schellhammer PF: Prostate-specific antigen for pretreatment prediction and posttreatment evaluation of outcome after definitive irradiation for prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 32 (2): 307-16, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Sandler HM, Dunn RL, McLaughlin PW, et al.: Overall survival after prostate-specific-antigen-detected recurrence following conformal radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 48 (3): 629-33, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Ruckle HC, Klee GG, Oesterling JE: Prostate-specific antigen: concepts for staging prostate cancer and monitoring response to therapy. Mayo Clin Proc 69 (1): 69-79, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Staging Tests Serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levelMagnetic resonance imaging (MRI)Positron emission tomography (PET)Pelvic lymph node dissection (PLND)Transrectal or transperineal  biopsyTransrectal ultrasound (TRUS)Computed tomography (CT) scansTechnetium Tc 99m (99mTc)-methylene diphosphonate (MDP) bone scan Staging Systems AJCC Stage Groupings and TNM Definitions Serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) Positron emission tomography (PET) Pelvic lymph node dissection (PLND) Transrectal or transperineal  biopsy Transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) Computed tomography (CT) scans Technetium Tc 99m (99mTc)-methylene diphosphonate (MDP) bone scan Most men are diagnosed with prostate cancer at an early clinical stage and do not have detectable metastases.  Therefore, they generally do not have to undergo staging tests, such as a bone scan, computed tomography (CT), or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).  However, staging studies  are done if there is clinical suspicion of metastasis, such as bone pain; local tumor spread beyond the prostate capsule; or a substantial risk of metastasis (prostate-specific antigen [PSA] >20 ng/mL and Gleason score >7).[1] Tests used to determine stage include the following: Serum PSA level. MRI. Positron emission tomography (PET).Gallium Ga 68 (68Ga)-gozetotide and fluorine F 18 (18F)-piflufolastat PET-CT.Fluorine F 18 (18F)-fluciclovine PET-CT. Pelvic lymph node dissection (PLND). Transrectal or transperineal biopsy. Transrectal ultrasound  (TRUS). CT scans. Technetium Tc 99m (99mTc)-methylene diphosphonate (MDP) bone scan. Gallium Ga 68 (68Ga)-gozetotide and fluorine F 18 (18F)-piflufolastat PET-CT. Fluorine F 18 (18F)-fluciclovine PET-CT. Serum PSA can predict the results of radionuclide bone scans in newly
diagnosed patients. In one series, only 2 of 852 patients (0.23%) with a PSA of less than 20 ng/mL had a positive bone scan in the absence of
bone pain.[2] In another series of 265 patients with prostate cancer, 0 of 23 patients with a
PSA of less than 4 ng/mL had a positive bone scan, and 2 of 114 patients with a PSA of less than 10 ng/mL had
a positive bone scan.[3] Although MRI   has been used to detect extracapsular extension of prostate cancer, a
positive-predictive value of about 70% and considerable interobserver variation
are problems that make its routine use in staging uncertain.[4]    Ultrasound and MRI, however, can reduce clinical understaging and thereby improve patient selection for local therapy. MRI with an endorectal coil appears to be more accurate for identification of organ-confined and extracapsular disease, especially when combined with spectroscopy.[1]  MRI is a
poor tool for evaluating nodal disease. MRI is more sensitive than radionuclide bone scans in the detection of bone metastases, but it is impractical for evaluating the entire skeletal system. It is becoming more common to use PET-CT with specific radionuclide tracers to stage prostate cancer. Several tracers have been tested and shown the ability to detect either lymph node or distant metastases in certain patients with prostate cancer. Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) is a transmembrane receptor expressed in high levels in prostate cancer. PSMA can be targeted for imaging with 68Ga-gozetotide and 18F-piflufolastat. These radionuclide tracers have been tested for the imaging of nodes and metastases in the initial staging of intermediate- and high-risk prostate cancer, as well as imaging of suspected posttreatment recurrent disease in patients with an elevated PSA. A phase III trial included 764 patients with intermediate- or high-risk prostate cancer who underwent 68Ga-gozetotide PET-CT staging. The trial reported  a sensitivity of 40% and a specificity of 95% in the detection of nodal disease as compared with PLND.[5] 68Ga-gozetotide PET-CT was studied alongside CT and bone scan for the detection of metastatic disease in men with high-risk prostate cancer. Compared with conventional imaging, 68Ga-gozetotide PET-CT provided increased sensitivity (85% vs. 38%) and specificity (98% vs. 91%).[6] 68Ga-gozetotide PET-CT was also evaluated to assess recurrent disease and showed a high positive predictive value (PPV) and detection rate.[7] 68Ga-gozetotide also had better results than 18F-fluciclovine in that context.[8] 18F-piflufolastat PET-CT had a sensitivity of 40% and a specificity of 98% in staging intermediate- or high-risk prostate cancer compared with PLND.[9] For the detection of recurrent or metastatic prostate cancer in the context of increasing PSA, 18F-piflufolastat PET-CT had a sensitivity  of 95.8% and a PPV of 81.9%.[9] Based on these data, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved 68Ga-gozetotide and 18F-piflufolastat PET-CT for the initial staging of patients with prostate cancer and suspicion of metastatic disease, and for the evaluation of potential recurrence based on an elevated posttreatment PSA.[10,11] 18F-fluciclovine PET-CT showed low sensitivity but high specificity in the initial lymph nodal staging of intermediate- and high-risk prostate cancer, compared with PLND.[12-14] Compared with conventional imaging, its specificity was similar, but sensitivity was higher for detection of extraprostatic disease.[14] 18F-fluciclovine also detected more bone metastases and was more sensitive and specific than 99mTc-MDP bone scan.[15] The FDA approved 18F-fluciclovine PET-CT for the assessment of suspected recurrent disease in men with a rising posttreatment PSA. PLND remains the most accurate
method to assess metastasis to the pelvic nodes, and laparoscopic PLND has been
shown to accurately assess pelvic nodes as effectively as an open procedure.[16] The determining factor in deciding whether any type of PLND is indicated is
when definitive therapy may be altered.  For example, radical prostatectomy is generally reserved for men without lymph node metastasis.  Likewise, preoperative seminal
vesicle biopsy may be useful in patients with palpable nodules who are being
considered for radical prostatectomy (unless they have a low Gleason score)
because seminal vesicle involvement could affect the choice of primary therapy and
predicts for pelvic lymph node metastasis.[17] In patients with clinically localized (stage I or stage II) prostate cancer, Gleason pathological grade and enzymatic serum prostatic acid phosphatase values (even within normal range) predict the likelihood of capsular penetration, seminal vesicle invasion, or regional lymph node involvement.[18] Analysis of a series of 166 patients with clinical stage I or stage II prostate cancer undergoing radical prostatectomy revealed an association between Gleason biopsy score and the risk of lymph node metastasis found at surgery. The risks of nodal metastasis for patients grouped according to their Gleason biopsy score was 2% for a Gleason score of 5, 13% for a Gleason score of 6, and 23% for a Gleason score of 8.[19] Having all patients undergo a PLND is debatable, but in patients undergoing a radical retropubic
prostatectomy, nodal status is usually ascertained as a matter of course.  Evidence is mounting that PLND is likely unnecessary in patients with a PSA less than 20 ng/mL and a low Gleason score who are undergoing radical perineal prostatectomy. This is especially true for patients whose malignancy was not palpable but detected on ultrasound.[18,20] The most common means to establish a diagnosis and determine the Gleason score in cases of suspected prostate cancer is by needle biopsy.  Most urologists now perform a transrectal biopsy using a bioptic gun with ultrasound guidance.  Less frequently, a transperineal ultrasound-guided approach can be used for those patients who may be at increased risk of complications from a transrectal approach.[21] Over the years, there has been a trend toward taking eight  to ten or more biopsy samples from several areas of the prostate with a consequent increased yield of cancer detection after an elevated PSA blood test.[1] TRUS may facilitate diagnosis by directing needle
biopsy; however, ultrasound   is operator dependent and does not assess lymph
node size. A prospective multi-institutional study of preoperative
TRUS in men with clinically localized prostate cancer eligible for
radical prostatectomy showed that TRUS was no better than digital rectal
examination in predicting extracapsular tumor extension or seminal vesicle
involvement.[22] CT scans can detect grossly enlarged lymph nodes but
poorly define intraprostatic features;[23] therefore, it is not reliable for
the staging of pelvic node disease when compared with surgical staging.[24] A 99mTc-MDP bone scan is the most widely used test for metastasis to the bone, which is the most common site of
distant tumor spread. Historically, two systems  have been in common use for the staging of prostate cancer. In 1975, the Jewett
system (stage A through stage D) was described and has since been
modified.[25] This staging system is no longer in common use, but older studies and publications may refer to it. In 1997, the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) and the International Union Against Cancer adopted a revised TNM (tumor, node, metastasis) system, which used the same broad T-stage categories as the Jewett system but included subcategories of T stage, such as a stage to describe patients diagnosed through PSA screening. This revised TNM system more precisely stratifies newly diagnosed patients. The AJCC has designated staging by TNM classification.[26] Zelefsky MJ, Eastham JA, Sartor AO: Cancer of the prostate. In: DeVita VT Jr, Lawrence TS, Rosenberg SA: Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology. 9th ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2011, pp 1220-71. Oesterling JE, Martin SK, Bergstralh EJ, et al.: The use of prostate-specific antigen in staging patients with newly diagnosed prostate cancer. JAMA 269 (1): 57-60, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Huncharek M, Muscat J: Serum prostate-specific antigen as a predictor of radiographic staging studies in newly diagnosed prostate cancer. Cancer Invest 13 (1): 31-5, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Schiebler ML, Yankaskas BC, Tempany C, et al.: MR imaging in adenocarcinoma of the prostate: interobserver variation and efficacy for determining stage C disease. AJR Am J Roentgenol 158 (3): 559-62; discussion 563-4, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Hope TA, Eiber M, Armstrong WR, et al.: Diagnostic Accuracy of 68Ga-PSMA-11 PET for Pelvic Nodal Metastasis Detection Prior to Radical Prostatectomy and Pelvic Lymph Node Dissection: A Multicenter Prospective Phase 3 Imaging Trial. JAMA Oncol 7 (11): 1635-1642, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Hofman MS, Lawrentschuk N, Francis RJ, et al.: Prostate-specific membrane antigen PET-CT in patients with high-risk prostate cancer before curative-intent surgery or radiotherapy (proPSMA): a prospective, randomised, multicentre study. Lancet 395 (10231): 1208-1216, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] Fendler WP, Calais J, Eiber M, et al.: Assessment of 68Ga-PSMA-11 PET Accuracy in Localizing Recurrent Prostate Cancer: A Prospective Single-Arm Clinical Trial. JAMA Oncol 5 (6): 856-863, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Calais J, Ceci F, Eiber M, et al.: 18F-fluciclovine PET-CT and 68Ga-PSMA-11 PET-CT in patients with early biochemical recurrence after prostatectomy: a prospective, single-centre, single-arm, comparative imaging trial. Lancet Oncol 20 (9): 1286-1294, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Pienta KJ, Gorin MA, Rowe SP, et al.: A Phase 2/3 Prospective Multicenter Study of the Diagnostic Accuracy of Prostate Specific Membrane Antigen PET/CT with 18F-DCFPyL in Prostate Cancer Patients (OSPREY). J Urol 206 (1): 52-61, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] U.S. Food and Drug Administration: FDA approves first PSMA-targeted PET imaging drug for men with prostate cancer. Food and Drug Administration, 2020. Available online. Last accessed March 11, 2024. U.S. Food and Drug Administration: FDA approves second PSMA-targeted PET imaging drug for men with prostate cancer. Food and Drug Administration, 2021. Available online. Last accessed March 11, 2024. Selnæs KM, Krüger-Stokke B, Elschot M, et al.: 18F-Fluciclovine PET/MRI for preoperative lymph node staging in high-risk prostate cancer patients. Eur Radiol 28 (8): 3151-3159, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Suzuki H, Jinnouchi S, Kaji Y, et al.: Diagnostic performance of 18F-fluciclovine PET/CT for regional lymph node metastases in patients with primary prostate cancer: a multicenter phase II clinical trial. Jpn J Clin Oncol 49 (9): 803-811, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Alemozaffar M, Akintayo AA, Abiodun-Ojo OA, et al.: [18F]Fluciclovine Positron Emission Tomography/Computerized Tomography for Preoperative Staging in Patients with Intermediate to High Risk Primary Prostate Cancer. J Urol 204 (4): 734-740, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] Chen B, Wei P, Macapinlac HA, et al.: Comparison of 18F-Fluciclovine PET/CT and 99mTc-MDP bone scan in detection of bone metastasis in prostate cancer. Nucl Med Commun 40 (9): 940-946, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Schuessler WW, Pharand D, Vancaillie TG: Laparoscopic standard pelvic node dissection for carcinoma of the prostate: is it accurate? J Urol 150 (3): 898-901, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Stone NN, Stock RG, Unger P: Indications for seminal vesicle biopsy and laparoscopic pelvic lymph node dissection in men with localized carcinoma of the prostate. J Urol 154 (4): 1392-6, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Oesterling JE, Brendler CB, Epstein JI, et al.: Correlation of clinical stage, serum prostatic acid phosphatase and preoperative Gleason grade with final pathological stage in 275 patients with clinically localized adenocarcinoma of the prostate. J Urol 138 (1): 92-8, 1987. [PUBMED Abstract] Fournier GR, Narayan P: Re-evaluation of the need for pelvic lymphadenectomy in low grade prostate cancer. Br J Urol 72 (4): 484-8, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Daniels GF, McNeal JE, Stamey TA: Predictive value of contralateral biopsies in unilaterally palpable prostate cancer. J Urol 147 (3 Pt 2): 870-4, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Webb JA, Shanmuganathan K, McLean A: Complications of ultrasound-guided transperineal prostate biopsy. A prospective study. Br J Urol 72 (5 Pt 2): 775-7, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Smith JA, Scardino PT, Resnick MI, et al.: Transrectal ultrasound versus digital rectal examination for the staging of carcinoma of the prostate: results of a prospective, multi-institutional trial. J Urol 157 (3): 902-6, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Gerber GS, Goldberg R, Chodak GW: Local staging of prostate cancer by tumor volume, prostate-specific antigen, and transrectal ultrasound. Urology 40 (4): 311-6, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Hanks GE, Krall JM, Pilepich MV, et al.: Comparison of pathologic and clinical evaluation of lymph nodes in prostate cancer: implications of RTOG data for patient management and trial design and stratification. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 23 (2): 293-8, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Jewett HJ: The present status of radical prostatectomy for stages A and B prostatic cancer. Urol Clin North Am 2 (1): 105-24, 1975. [PUBMED Abstract] Prostate. In: Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al., eds.: AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 8th ed. Springer; 2017, pp. 715–26. Epstein JI, Egevad L, Amin MB, et al.: The 2014 International Society of Urological Pathology (ISUP) Consensus Conference on Gleason Grading of Prostatic Carcinoma: Definition of Grading Patterns and Proposal for a New Grading System. Am J Surg Pathol 40 (2): 244-52, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Watchful Waiting or Active Surveillance/Active Monitoring Radical ProstatectomyRadical prostatectomy compared with other treatment optionsComplications of radical prostatectomy Radiation Therapy and Radiopharmaceutical TherapyExternal-beam radiation therapy (EBRT) Brachytherapy Radiopharmaceutical therapyComplications of radiation therapy Reducing complicationsComparison of complications from radiation therapy and from radical prostatectomy Hormonal Therapy and Its ComplicationsAbiraterone acetateBilateral orchiectomy Estrogen therapyLuteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) agonist therapyAntiandrogen therapy Antiadrenal therapy Cryosurgery Proton-Beam Therapy Photodynamic Therapy Neoadjuvant Hormonal Therapy Bicalutamide Radical prostatectomy compared with other treatment options Complications of radical prostatectomy External-beam radiation therapy (EBRT) Brachytherapy Radiopharmaceutical therapy Complications of radiation therapy Reducing complications Comparison of complications from radiation therapy and from radical prostatectomy Abiraterone acetate Bilateral orchiectomy Estrogen therapy Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) agonist therapy Antiandrogen therapy Antiadrenal therapy Local treatment modalities are associated with prolonged disease-free survival (DFS) for many patients with localized prostate cancer but are rarely curative in patients with locally extensive tumors. Because of clinical understaging using current diagnostic techniques, even when the cancer appears clinically localized to the prostate gland, some patients develop disseminated tumors after local therapy with surgery or radiation. Treatment options for each stage of prostate cancer are presented in Table 6. Side effects of each of the treatment approaches are covered in the relevant sections below.  Patient-reported adverse effects differ substantially across the options for management of clinically localized disease, with few direct comparisons, and include watchful waiting/active surveillance/active monitoring, radical prostatectomy, and radiation therapy.  The differences in adverse effects  can play an important role in patient choice among treatment options.  Detailed comparisons of these effects have been reported in population-based cohort studies, albeit with relatively short follow-up times of 2 to 3 years.[1,2] Asymptomatic patients of advanced age or with concomitant illness may warrant
consideration of careful observation without immediate active treatment.[3,4] Watch and wait, observation, expectant management, and active surveillance/active monitoring are terms indicating a strategy that does not employ immediate therapy with curative intent. Watchful waiting and active surveillance/active monitoring are the most commonly used terms, and the literature does not always clearly distinguish them, making the interpretation of results difficult.  The general concept of watchful waiting is patient follow-up with the application of palliative care as needed to alleviate symptoms of tumor progression.  There is no planned attempt at curative therapy at any point in follow-up.  For example, transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) or hormonal therapy may be used to alleviate tumor-related urethral obstruction should there be local tumor growth; hormonal therapy or bone radiation might be used to alleviate pain from metastases. Radical prostatectomy has been compared with watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring in men with early-stage disease (i.e., clinical stages T1b, T1c, or T2).[5]  For more information, see  the Radical Prostatectomy section. In contrast, the strategy behind active surveillance/active monitoring is to defer therapy for clinically localized disease but regularly follow the patient and initiate local therapy with curative intent if there are any signs of local tumor progression.[6-9] The intention is to avoid the morbidity of therapy in men who have indolent or nonprogressive disease but preserve the ability to cure them should the tumor progress.  Active surveillance/active monitoring often involves the following: Regular patient visits. Digital rectal examinations. Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing. Transrectal ultrasound (in some series). Transrectal needle biopsies (in some series). Patient selection, testing intervals, and specific tests, as well as criteria for intervention, are arbitrary and not established in controlled trials. In the United States, as in other settings with widespread PSA screening, the results of conservative management of localized prostate cancer are particularly favorable.   In the aggregate, men managed by watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring (using various criteria, depending upon the study) have had very favorable prostate–cancer-specific mortalities ranging from about 1% to 10% (with the most favorable rates in more recent series).[10-18] Most men with screen-detected prostate cancer may, therefore, be candidates for active surveillance/active monitoring, with definitive therapy reserved for signs of tumor progression. This has been shown most clearly in the large Prostate Testing for Cancer Treatment (ProtecT [NCT02044172 and ISRCTN20141297]) randomized trial that compared active monitoring, radical prostatectomy, and radiation therapy.[19] For more information, see the   Radical Prostatectomy section. For more information, see the Treatment of Stage II Prostate Cancer section. A radical prostatectomy is usually reserved for patients who:[20-22] Are in good health and elect surgical intervention. Have tumor confined to the prostate gland (stage I and stage II). Open prostatectomy can be performed by the perineal or retropubic approach. The perineal approach requires a separate incision for lymph node dissection. Laparoscopic lymphadenectomy is technically possible.[23] Robot-assisted prostatectomy is an alternative to open prostatectomy and has become the most common technique in developed countries.  In experienced hands, functional outcomes between open and robot-assisted prostatectomy appear very similar, at least in the short- to mid-term.  In a randomized trial of 308 men suitable for prostatectomy, urinary, sexual, and bowel functional outcomes were similar between open retropubic and robotic surgeries at a median follow-up of 24 months.[24]   The sample size and duration of follow-up were too small to detect meaningful differences in cancer outcomes. For small, well-differentiated nodules, the incidence of positive pelvic nodes is less than 20%, and pelvic node dissection may be omitted.[25] With larger, less-differentiated tumors, a pelvic lymph node dissection is more important. In these cases, the value of open surgical or laparoscopic pelvic node dissection is not therapeutic, but it spares patients with positive nodes the morbidity of prostatectomy. Radical prostatectomy is usually not performed if a frozen-section evaluation of pelvic nodes reveals metastases; these patients should be considered for entry into existing clinical trials or receive radiation therapy to control local symptoms. The role of preoperative (neoadjuvant) hormonal therapy is not established.[26,27] After  radical prostatectomy, pathological evaluation stratifies tumor extent into the following classes: Margin-positive disease—The incidence of disease recurrence increases when the tumor margins are positive.[10,28,29] Results of the outcome of patients with positive surgical margins have not been systematically reported. Specimen-confined disease—The incidence of disease recurrence increases when the tumor is not specimen-confined (extracapsular).[10,28] Organ-confined disease—Patients with extraprostatic disease (not organ-confined) are suitable candidates for clinical trials of which the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group's (RTOG) RTOG-9601 trial (NCT00002874), was an example. These trials have  included evaluation of postoperative radiation delivery, cytotoxic agents, and hormonal treatment using luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) agonists and/or antiandrogens. In 1993, a structured literature review of 144 papers was done in an attempt to compare the three primary treatment strategies for clinically localized prostate cancer:[30] Radical prostatectomy. Definitive radiation therapy. Observation (watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring). The authors concluded that poor reporting and selection factors within all series precluded a valid comparison of efficacy for the three management strategies. In a literature review of case series of patients with palpable, clinically localized disease, the authors found that 10-year prostate−cancer-specific survival rates were best in radical prostatectomy series (about 93%), worst in radiation therapy series (about 75%), and intermediate with deferred treatment (about 85%).[31] Because it is highly unlikely that radiation therapy would worsen disease-specific survival, the most likely explanation is that selection factors affect choice of treatment. Such selection factors make comparisons of therapeutic strategies imprecise.[32] Radical prostatectomy has been compared with watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring  in men with early-stage disease (i.e., clinical stages T1b, T1c, or T2) in randomized trials, with conflicting results. The difference in results may be the result of differences in how the men were diagnosed with prostate cancer. Evidence (radical prostatectomy vs. watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring): In a randomized clinical trial performed in Sweden in the pre-PSA screening era, 695 men with prostate cancer were randomly assigned to radical prostatectomy versus watchful waiting. Only about 5% of the men in the trial had been diagnosed by PSA screening.  Therefore, the men had more extensive local disease than is typically the case in men diagnosed with prostate cancer in the United States.[33-35]The cumulative overall mortality at 18 years was 56.1%   in the radical prostatectomy arm and 68.9% in the  watchful waiting study arm (absolute difference, 12.7%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 5.1–20.3 percentage points; relative risk [RR]death, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.59–0.86).[35][Level of evidence A1] The cumulative incidence of prostate cancer deaths at 18 years was 17.7% versus 28.7% (absolute difference, 11.0%; 95% CI, 4.5–17.5 percentage points; RRdeath from prostate cancer, 0.56; 95% CI, 0.41–0.77).[35]In a post-hoc–subset analysis, the improvement in overall and prostate cancer-specific mortality associated with radical prostatectomy was restricted to men younger than 65 years. The Prostate Intervention Versus Observation Trial (PIVOT-1 or VA-CSP-407) is a randomized trial conducted in the PSA screening era that directly compared radical prostatectomy with watchful waiting. From November 1994 through January 2002, 731 men aged 75 years or younger with localized prostate cancer (stage T1–2, NX, M0, with a blood PSA <50 ng/mL) and a life expectancy of at least 10 years were randomly assigned to radical prostatectomy or watchful waiting.[5,36,37][Level of evidence A1]About 50% of the men had nonpalpable, screen-detected disease.After a median follow-up of 12.7 years (range up to about 19.5 years), the all-cause mortality was 61.3%  in the prostatectomy arm versus 66.8% in the watchful-waiting study arm, with an absolute difference of 5.5 percentage points (95% CI,  -1.5–12.4) that was not statistically significant (hazard ratio [HR], 0.84; 95% CI, 0.70–1.01).  Prostate cancer-specific mortality was 7.4% versus 11.4%, and it also was not statistically significant (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.3–1.02).	Although treatment for disease progression was given more frequently in the observation arm of the study, most of the treatment was for asymptomatic, local, or biochemical (PSA) progression.	As expected, urinary incontinence and erectile/sexual dysfunction was more common in the prostatectomy group during at least 10 years of follow-up.  Absolute differences in patient-reported use of absorbent urinary pads was greater in the surgery group by more than 30 percentage points at all time points for at least 10 years.  Disease- or treatment-related limitations in activities of daily living were worse with surgery than with observation through 2 years, but then were similar in both study arms. In the ProtecT trial (NCT02044172 and ISRCTN20141297), 82,429 men were screened with PSA testing, and 2,664 were diagnosed with clinically localized prostate cancer. Among those diagnosed, 1,643 men (median age 62 years, range 50–69 years) consented to a randomly assigned comparison of active monitoring, radical prostatectomy (nerve-sparing when possible), or external-beam 3-dimensional (3D) conformal radiation therapy (74 Gy in 37 fractions).  The primary end point was prostate cancer–specific mortality.[19]   With a median follow-up of 10 years, there were 17 deaths from prostate cancer, with no statistically significant differences among the three study arms (P = .48).  The 10-year prostate cancer–specific survival rates were 98.8% in the active monitoring arm, 99.0% in the radical prostatectomy arm, and 99.6% in the radiation therapy arm.[19][Level of evidence A1]Likewise, all-cause mortality was nearly identical in all three study arms: 10.9 deaths in the active monitoring arm, 10.1 in the radical prostatectomy arm, and 10.3 in the radiation therapy arm per 1,000 person-years (P = .87).[19][Level of evidence A1]There were statistically significant differences in progression to metastatic disease among the treatment arms (33 of 545 men in the active monitoring arm; 13 of 553 men in the radical prostatectomy arm; 16 of 545 men in the radiation therapy arm) that began to emerge after 4 years, but these differences had not translated into any difference in mortality after 10 years of follow-up. Over the course of 10 years, 52% of the patients required active intervention.As expected, there were substantial differences in patient-reported outcomes among the three management approaches.[38][Level of evidence A3]  A substudy of patient-reported outcomes up to 6 years after randomization included the following:     Men in the radical prostatectomy study arm had substantial rates of urinary incontinence (e.g., using one or more absorbent pads qd was reported by 46% at 6 months and by 17% at year 6) with very little incontinence in the other two study arms.Sexual function was also worse in the radical prostatectomy group (e.g., at 6 months, 12% of men reported erections firm enough for intercourse versus 22% in the radiation therapy arm and 52% in the active monitoring arm).  Bowel function, however, was worse in the radiation therapy arm (e.g., about 5% reported bloody stools at least half the time at 2 years and beyond vs. none in the radical prostatectomy and active-monitoring study arms). The cumulative overall mortality at 18 years was 56.1%   in the radical prostatectomy arm and 68.9% in the  watchful waiting study arm (absolute difference, 12.7%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 5.1–20.3 percentage points; relative risk [RR]death, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.59–0.86).[35][Level of evidence A1] The cumulative incidence of prostate cancer deaths at 18 years was 17.7% versus 28.7% (absolute difference, 11.0%; 95% CI, 4.5–17.5 percentage points; RRdeath from prostate cancer, 0.56; 95% CI, 0.41–0.77).[35] In a post-hoc–subset analysis, the improvement in overall and prostate cancer-specific mortality associated with radical prostatectomy was restricted to men younger than 65 years. About 50% of the men had nonpalpable, screen-detected disease. After a median follow-up of 12.7 years (range up to about 19.5 years), the all-cause mortality was 61.3%  in the prostatectomy arm versus 66.8% in the watchful-waiting study arm, with an absolute difference of 5.5 percentage points (95% CI,  -1.5–12.4) that was not statistically significant (hazard ratio [HR], 0.84; 95% CI, 0.70–1.01).  Prostate cancer-specific mortality was 7.4% versus 11.4%, and it also was not statistically significant (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.3–1.02). Although treatment for disease progression was given more frequently in the observation arm of the study, most of the treatment was for asymptomatic, local, or biochemical (PSA) progression. As expected, urinary incontinence and erectile/sexual dysfunction was more common in the prostatectomy group during at least 10 years of follow-up.  Absolute differences in patient-reported use of absorbent urinary pads was greater in the surgery group by more than 30 percentage points at all time points for at least 10 years.  Disease- or treatment-related limitations in activities of daily living were worse with surgery than with observation through 2 years, but then were similar in both study arms. With a median follow-up of 10 years, there were 17 deaths from prostate cancer, with no statistically significant differences among the three study arms (P = .48).  The 10-year prostate cancer–specific survival rates were 98.8% in the active monitoring arm, 99.0% in the radical prostatectomy arm, and 99.6% in the radiation therapy arm.[19][Level of evidence A1] Likewise, all-cause mortality was nearly identical in all three study arms: 10.9 deaths in the active monitoring arm, 10.1 in the radical prostatectomy arm, and 10.3 in the radiation therapy arm per 1,000 person-years (P = .87).[19][Level of evidence A1] There were statistically significant differences in progression to metastatic disease among the treatment arms (33 of 545 men in the active monitoring arm; 13 of 553 men in the radical prostatectomy arm; 16 of 545 men in the radiation therapy arm) that began to emerge after 4 years, but these differences had not translated into any difference in mortality after 10 years of follow-up. Over the course of 10 years, 52% of the patients required active intervention. As expected, there were substantial differences in patient-reported outcomes among the three management approaches.[38][Level of evidence A3]  A substudy of patient-reported outcomes up to 6 years after randomization included the following:     Men in the radical prostatectomy study arm had substantial rates of urinary incontinence (e.g., using one or more absorbent pads qd was reported by 46% at 6 months and by 17% at year 6) with very little incontinence in the other two study arms.Sexual function was also worse in the radical prostatectomy group (e.g., at 6 months, 12% of men reported erections firm enough for intercourse versus 22% in the radiation therapy arm and 52% in the active monitoring arm).  Bowel function, however, was worse in the radiation therapy arm (e.g., about 5% reported bloody stools at least half the time at 2 years and beyond vs. none in the radical prostatectomy and active-monitoring study arms). Men in the radical prostatectomy study arm had substantial rates of urinary incontinence (e.g., using one or more absorbent pads qd was reported by 46% at 6 months and by 17% at year 6) with very little incontinence in the other two study arms. Sexual function was also worse in the radical prostatectomy group (e.g., at 6 months, 12% of men reported erections firm enough for intercourse versus 22% in the radiation therapy arm and 52% in the active monitoring arm). Bowel function, however, was worse in the radiation therapy arm (e.g., about 5% reported bloody stools at least half the time at 2 years and beyond vs. none in the radical prostatectomy and active-monitoring study arms). Complications of radical prostatectomy include the following: Morbidity and mortality associated with general anesthesia and a major surgical procedure.[39-41] Urinary incontinence and impotence.[42-49] Penile shortening.[50-52] Inguinal hernia.[53-57] Fecal incontinence.[58] Functional outcomes of radical prostatectomy with respect to sexual, urinary, bowel function, and health-related quality of life (QOL), appear to be similar whether the procedure is open retropubic, laparoscopic, or robot-assisted radical prostatectomy.[59] An analysis of Medicare records on 101,604 radical prostatectomies performed from 1991 to 1994 showed the following:[39] A 30-day operative mortality rate of 0.5%. A rehospitalization rate of 4.5%. A major complication rate of 28.6%. Over the study period, these rates decreased by 30%, 8%, and 12%, respectively.[39] Prostatectomies done at hospitals where fewer of the procedures were performed than those done at hospitals where more were performed were associated with the following:[40,41] Higher rates of 30-day postoperative mortality. Major acute surgical complications. Longer hospital stays. Higher rates of rehospitalization. Operative morbidity and mortality rates increase with age. Comorbidity, especially underlying cardiovascular disease and a history of stroke, accounts for a portion of the age-related increase in 30-day mortality. In a cohort of all men with prostate cancer who underwent radical prostatectomy from 1990 to 1999 in Ontario, 75-year-old men with no comorbidities had a predicted 30-day mortality of 0.74%. Thirty-day surgical complication rates also depended more on comorbidity than age (i.e., about 5% vs. 40% for men with 0 vs. ≥4 underlying comorbid conditions, respectively).[41] Urinary incontinence and impotence are complications that can result from radical prostatectomy and have been studied in multiple studies. Evidence (urinary incontinence and impotence after  radical prostatectomy): A large case series of men undergoing the anatomic (nerve-sparing) technique of radical prostatectomy reported the following:[43]	 Approximately 6% of the men required the use of pads for urinary incontinence, but an unknown additional proportion of men had occasional urinary dribbling. About 40% to 65% of the men who were sexually potent before surgery retained potency adequate for vaginal penetration and sexual intercourse. Preservation of potency with this technique is dependent on tumor stage and patient age, but the operation probably induces at least a partial deficit in nearly all patients. A national survey of Medicare patients who underwent radical prostatectomy in 1988 to 1990 reported more morbidity than in the case series reported above.[44]More than 30% of the men reported the need for pads or clamps for urinary wetness, and 63% of all patients reported a current problem with wetness.About 60% of the men reported having no erections since surgery; about 90% of the men had no erections sufficient for intercourse during the month before the survey.  About 28% of the patients reported follow-up treatment of cancer with radiation therapy and/or hormonal therapy within 4 years after their prostatectomy. A population-based longitudinal cohort (Prostate Cancer Outcomes Study) of 901 men aged 55 to 74 years who had recently undergone radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer reported the following:[45]15.4% of the men had either frequent urinary incontinence or no urinary control at 5 years after surgery.20.4% of those studied wore pads to stay dry.	79.3% of men reported an inability to have an erection sufficient for intercourse. A cross-sectional survey of patients with prostate cancer who were treated with radical prostatectomy, radiation therapy, or watchful waiting and active surveillance in a managed care setting  showed substantial sexual and urinary dysfunction in the prostatectomy group.[46]   Results reported by the patients were consistent with those from the national Medicare survey.In addition, although statistical power was limited, differences in sexual and urinary dysfunction between men who had undergone either nerve-sparing or standard radical prostatectomy were not statistically significant.  This issue requires more study. Case series of 93, 459, and 89 men who had undergone radical prostatectomy by experienced surgeons showed rates of impotence as high as those in the national Medicare survey when men were carefully questioned about sexual potency, although the men in these case series were on average younger than those in the Medicare survey.[47-49] One of the case series used the same questionnaire as that used in the Medicare survey.[47] The urinary incontinence rate in that series was also similar to that in the Medicare survey. Approximately 6% of the men required the use of pads for urinary incontinence, but an unknown additional proportion of men had occasional urinary dribbling. About 40% to 65% of the men who were sexually potent before surgery retained potency adequate for vaginal penetration and sexual intercourse. Preservation of potency with this technique is dependent on tumor stage and patient age, but the operation probably induces at least a partial deficit in nearly all patients. More than 30% of the men reported the need for pads or clamps for urinary wetness, and 63% of all patients reported a current problem with wetness. About 60% of the men reported having no erections since surgery; about 90% of the men had no erections sufficient for intercourse during the month before the survey. About 28% of the patients reported follow-up treatment of cancer with radiation therapy and/or hormonal therapy within 4 years after their prostatectomy. 15.4% of the men had either frequent urinary incontinence or no urinary control at 5 years after surgery. 20.4% of those studied wore pads to stay dry. 79.3% of men reported an inability to have an erection sufficient for intercourse. Results reported by the patients were consistent with those from the national Medicare survey. In addition, although statistical power was limited, differences in sexual and urinary dysfunction between men who had undergone either nerve-sparing or standard radical prostatectomy were not statistically significant.  This issue requires more study. Differences are often reported between population-based surveys and case series from individual centers.  Reasons could include the following: Age differences among the populations. Surgical expertise at the major reporting centers. Patient selection factors. Publication bias of favorable series. Different methods of collecting information from patients. Case series of men who have undergone radical prostatectomy have shown shortening of penile length (by an average of 1–2 cm).[50-52] The functional consequence of the shortening is not well studied, but it is noticeable to some men. In a registry of men with rising PSA after initial treatment of clinically localized prostate cancer, 19 of 510 men (3.7%) who had undergone radical prostatectomy complained of reduced penile size.[60] However, the data were based upon physician reporting of patients' complaints rather than direct patient questioning or before-and-after measurement of penile length.  Also, the study sample was restricted to patients with known or suspected tumor recurrence, making generalization difficult. Recovery of penile length to preoperative measurements within 1 to 2 years has been reported in some, but not all, case series in which men were followed longitudinally.[61] Inguinal hernia has been reported as a complication of radical prostatectomy. Evidence (inguinal hernia after radical prostatectomy): Retrospective cohort studies and case series have shown an increased incidence of inguinal hernia, ranging from 7% to 21%, in men undergoing radical prostatectomy, with rates peaking within 2 years of surgery.[53-57] Observational studies suggest that the rates are higher than in comparable men who have undergone prostate biopsy alone, transurethral resections, and simple open prostatectomy for benign disease;[53,54] or in men with prostate cancer who have undergone pelvic lymph node dissection alone or radiation therapy.[53,55,56] Although the observations of increased rates of inguinal hernia after radical prostatectomy are consistent, it is conceivable that men with prostate cancer who are being followed carefully by urologists could have higher detection rates of hernia because of frequent examinations or diagnostic imaging (i.e., detection bias). Men should be made aware of this potential complication of prostatectomy. Radical prostatectomy may cause fecal incontinence, and the incidence may vary with surgical method.[58] Evidence (fecal incontinence after radical prostatectomy): In a national survey sample of 907 men who had undergone radical prostatectomy at least 1 year before the survey, 32% of the men who had undergone perineal (nerve-sparing) radical prostatectomy and 17% of the men who had undergone a retropubic radical prostatectomy reported accidents of fecal leakage. Ten percent of the respondents reported moderate amounts of fecal leakage, and 4% of the respondents reported large amounts of fecal leakage. Fewer than 15% of men with fecal incontinence had reported it to a physician or health care provider.[58] Candidates for definitive radiation therapy must have a confirmed pathological diagnosis of cancer that is clinically confined to the prostate and/or surrounding tissues (stage I, stage II, and stage III). Staging laparotomy and lymph node dissection are not required. Radiation therapy may be a good option for patients who are considered poor medical candidates for radical prostatectomy. These patients can be treated with an acceptably low complication rate if care is given to the delivery technique.[62] Long-term results with radiation therapy are dependent on stage and are associated with dosimetry of the radiation. Evidence (EBRT): A retrospective review of 999 patients treated with megavoltage radiation therapy showed that  cause-specific survival rates at 10 years varied substantially by T stage: T1 (79%), T2 (66%), T3 (55%), and T4 (22%).[63] An initial serum PSA level higher than 15 ng/mL is a predictor of probable failure with conventional radiation therapy.[64] Several randomized studies have demonstrated an improvement in freedom from biochemical (PSA-based) recurrence with higher doses of radiation therapy (74–79 Gy) as compared with lower doses (64–70 Gy).[65-69][Level of evidence B1]  None of the studies demonstrated a cause-specific survival benefit to higher doses. The MRC-RT01 study (NCT00003290) enrolled 843 men with stage T1b through T3a, N0, M0 prostate cancer. Patients were randomly assigned to receive 64 Gy in 32 fractions versus 74 Gy in 37 fractions by conformal delivery.[68] Men in both study groups received neoadjuvant LH-RH agonist injections every 4 weeks for 3 to 6 months before the start of radiation therapy and throughout the radiation course.  The study was powered to detect differences in both biochemical progression-free survival (PFS) and a 15% difference in overall survival (OS).After a median follow-up of 10 years, despite a statistically significant improvement in biochemical PFS with the higher dose of radiation, the 10-year OS rate was the same in both groups: 71% (HR, 0.99; 95% CI, 0.77–1.28; P = .96).  Likewise, there were no differences in prostate—cancer-specific survival.Likewise, in the RTOG-0126 trial (NCT00033631), 1,532 men with stage cT1b to T2b (Gleason score 2 to 6 and PSA 10 to <20 ng/mL or Gleason score 7 and PSA <15 ng/mL) prostate cancer were randomly assigned to receive 79.2 Gy in 44 fractions compared with 70.2 Gy in 39 fractions (using 3D conformal or intensity-modulated radiation therapy [IMRT]).[69]  With a median follow-up of 8.4 years (maximum, 13.0 years), 8-year OS rates were 76% and 75% (HR, 1.00; 95% CI, 0.83–1.20; P = .98).  However, the high-dose radiation was associated with increased late-grade 2 or greater gastrointestinal and genitourinary toxicities (21% and 12% with 79.2 Gy and 15% and 7% with 70.2 Gy). The MRC-RT01 study (NCT00003290) enrolled 843 men with stage T1b through T3a, N0, M0 prostate cancer. Patients were randomly assigned to receive 64 Gy in 32 fractions versus 74 Gy in 37 fractions by conformal delivery.[68] Men in both study groups received neoadjuvant LH-RH agonist injections every 4 weeks for 3 to 6 months before the start of radiation therapy and throughout the radiation course.  The study was powered to detect differences in both biochemical progression-free survival (PFS) and a 15% difference in overall survival (OS). After a median follow-up of 10 years, despite a statistically significant improvement in biochemical PFS with the higher dose of radiation, the 10-year OS rate was the same in both groups: 71% (HR, 0.99; 95% CI, 0.77–1.28; P = .96).  Likewise, there were no differences in prostate—cancer-specific survival. Likewise, in the RTOG-0126 trial (NCT00033631), 1,532 men with stage cT1b to T2b (Gleason score 2 to 6 and PSA 10 to <20 ng/mL or Gleason score 7 and PSA <15 ng/mL) prostate cancer were randomly assigned to receive 79.2 Gy in 44 fractions compared with 70.2 Gy in 39 fractions (using 3D conformal or intensity-modulated radiation therapy [IMRT]).[69]  With a median follow-up of 8.4 years (maximum, 13.0 years), 8-year OS rates were 76% and 75% (HR, 1.00; 95% CI, 0.83–1.20; P = .98).  However, the high-dose radiation was associated with increased late-grade 2 or greater gastrointestinal and genitourinary toxicities (21% and 12% with 79.2 Gy and 15% and 7% with 70.2 Gy). For more information, see the Radical prostatectomy compared with other treatment options section. Prophylactic radiation therapy to clinically or pathologically uninvolved pelvic lymph nodes does not appear to improve OS or prostate cancer-specific survival as was seen in the RTOG-7706 trial, for example.[70][Level of evidence A1] The more convenient schedules of  hypofractionated radiation therapy   (using fewer fractions at higher doses per fraction) appear to yield similar outcomes to conventional schedules of radiation, at least with respect to the intermediate outcomes of DFS and failure-free survival (low levels of evidence not known to translate into health outcomes), and early data on OS rates.  However, hypofractionated radiation may incur more toxicity than standard doses, depending on the schedules used.[71] Evidence (conventional vs. hypofractionated EBRT): In a small randomized trial, primarily from one treatment center, conventional hypofractionation was not found to be superior to conventional fractionation.[72]  In the trial, 303 assessable men were randomly assigned to receive IMRT for a total of 76 Gy in 38 fractions at 2.0 Gy per fraction (conventional IMRT [CIMRT]) versus IMRT for a total of 70.2 Gy in 26 fractions at 2.7 per fraction (hypofractionated IMRT [HIMRT]).  The primary end point was biochemical or clinical disease failure (BCDF).  The 5-year BCDF rates in the two arms were 21.4%  for the CIMRT arm (95% CI, 14.8%–28.7%) and 23.3% for the HIMRT arm (95% CI, 16.4%–31.0%; P = .75).  Likewise, there were no statistically significant differences in the secondary end points of overall mortality, prostate–cancer-specific mortality, prostate local failure, or distant failure, despite low  mortality rates, and the trial was underpowered for mortality end points.[72][Level of evidence B1] The much larger, multicenter CHHiP trial (NCT00392535) evaluated conventional or hypofractionated high-dose intensity-modulated radiotherapy in 3,216 men with prostate cancer. The men had stages T1b–T3a, N0, M0 cancer and an estimated risk of seminal vesicle involvement of less than 30% and were randomly assigned to receive either 74 Gy in 37 fractions (the conventional-fraction arm), 60 Gy in 20 fractions, or 57 Gy in 19 fractions (1:1:1 ratio).[73,74]  The trial was designed as a noninferiority study.	The primary end point of biochemical or clinical treatment failure was reported after a median follow-up of 62.4 months. The 5-year failure-free survival  rates were 88.3% (conventional, 74 Gy group), 90.6% (60 Gy group), and 85.9% (57 Gy group).  The 60 Gy hypofractionated group fulfilled noninferiority criteria compared with conventional  74 Gy fractionation, but the 57 Gy group did not.[74][Level of evidence B1] 		Overall mortality rates were very similar in the three groups: 9%, 7%, and 8%.[74][Level of evidence A1]A QOL substudy was conducted with 2,100 participants and showed nearly identical patient-reported outcomes in each of the three arms at 2 years after study entry (median follow-up, 50 months).[73][Level of evidence A3]The primary patient-reported outcome was bowel bother.  Frequency of moderate bother was 5%, 6%, and 5% in the three study groups.  Severe bother was reported in less than 1% of men in each study group.	Likewise, there were no differences in any of the secondary outcomes, which included  overall QOL, overall urinary bother, or overall sexual bother. The multicenter, randomized, phase III HYPRO trial (ISRCTN85138529) enrolled 820 men with intermediate- or high-risk prostate cancer (stages T1b–T4, NX–0, MX–0). The men were randomly assigned to receive either conventional radiation therapy (78 Gy in 39 fractions over 8 weeks) or  hypofractionated  radiation therapy (64.6 Gy in 19 fractions over 6.5 weeks) in a noninferiority design for hypofractionation.[75,76] Median follow-up was 60 months. 	The primary end point, 5-year relapse-free survival, was similar in the two study arms: 80.5% (95% CI, 75.7%–84.4%) with hypofractionation versus 77.1% (95% CI, 71.9%–81.5%), with conventional fractionation (HR, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.63–1.16; P = .36).[76][Level of evidence B1]  The overall 5-year survival rate in the two arms was also similar: 86.2% (95% CI, 82.3%–89.4%) with hypofractionation versus 85.9% (95% CI, 81.8%–89.2%) with conventional fractionation (HR, 1.02;  95% CI, 0.71–1.46; P = .92).[76][Level of evidence A1]With respect to toxicity (key end points of genitourinary [GU] or gastrointestinal [GI] grade 2+  toxicities at 3 years), noninferiority for hypofractionated radiation therapy could not be established after a median follow-up of 5 years: cumulative GU toxicity of 41.3% with hypofractionated radiation therapy versus 39% with conventional radiation therapy doses (HR, 1.16; 90% CI, 0.98–1.38); GI toxicity of 21.9% versus 17.7% (HR, 1.19; 90% CI, 0.93–1.52).Cumulative GU grade 3+ toxicity was higher in the hypofractionation group: 19.0% versus 12.9% (P = .02).	Stool frequency (≥6 qd) was higher in the hypofractionation group: 7% versus 3% (P = .034).In a substudy of 322 men who had a baseline assessment and at least one follow-up assessment, and either no or short-term androgen therapy, erectile dysfunction was similar between the two study arms during 3 years of follow-up.[77] The RTOG reported a noninferiority trial of 1,115 men with low-risk prostate cancer (T1b–T2c) who were randomly assigned to receive hypofractionated radiation therapy (70 Gy in 28 fractions over 5.6 weeks) versus conventional radiation therapy doses (73.8 Gy in 41 fractions over 8.2 weeks).[78]  	After a median follow-up of 5.8 years, the hypofractionated radiation therapy arm met the prospective noninferiority criterion with respect to DFS: 86.3% with hypofractionated radiation therapy versus 85.3% with conventional radiation therapy doses (consistent with HR, <1.52; P < .001 for the hypothesis of noninferiority).[78][Level of evidence B1]	There were 49 deaths in the hypofractionated radiation therapy arm and 51 deaths in the conventional radiation therapy doses arm (HR for OS, 0.95; conventional radiation therapy doses vs. hypofractionated radiation therapy; 95% CI, 0.64–1.41).	However, late GI grade 2+ toxicity was worse in the hypofractionated radiation therapy arm: 22.4% versus 14.0% (P = .002); there was also a trend toward worse late GU grade 2+ toxicity: 29.7% versus 22.8% (P = .06). In a multicenter trial (NCT00304759), 1,206 men with intermediate-risk prostate cancer (T1–2a Gleason score ≤6, PSA 10.1–20 ng/mL; T2b–2c Gleason ≤6, PSA ≤20 ng/mL; or T1–2 Gleason = 7, PSA ≤20 ng/mL) were randomly assigned in a noninferiority trial design to receive conventional radiation therapy (78 Gy in 39 fractions) versus hypofractionated radiation therapy (60 Gy over 20 fractions).[79] 	After a median follow-up of 6 years (maximum 10 years), the primary end point of biochemical clinical failure (87%, PSA failure) was nearly identical with each radiation therapy schedule (85% in both arms; [DFS, 95% CI, 82%–88%]; HR, 0.96; 90% CI, 0.77–1.20).[79][Level of evidence B1]	The trial was severely underpowered to detect any differences in overall or prostate-specific mortality.  Only 12 deaths in the conventional radiation therapy arm and 10 deaths in the hypofractionated radiation therapy arm were from prostate cancer. Only 14% of all deaths were attributed to prostate cancer.Short- and long-term genitourinary and gastrointestinal toxicities were similar in both study groups. The primary end point was biochemical or clinical disease failure (BCDF).  The 5-year BCDF rates in the two arms were 21.4%  for the CIMRT arm (95% CI, 14.8%–28.7%) and 23.3% for the HIMRT arm (95% CI, 16.4%–31.0%; P = .75). Likewise, there were no statistically significant differences in the secondary end points of overall mortality, prostate–cancer-specific mortality, prostate local failure, or distant failure, despite low  mortality rates, and the trial was underpowered for mortality end points.[72][Level of evidence B1] The primary end point of biochemical or clinical treatment failure was reported after a median follow-up of 62.4 months. The 5-year failure-free survival  rates were 88.3% (conventional, 74 Gy group), 90.6% (60 Gy group), and 85.9% (57 Gy group).  The 60 Gy hypofractionated group fulfilled noninferiority criteria compared with conventional  74 Gy fractionation, but the 57 Gy group did not.[74][Level of evidence B1] Overall mortality rates were very similar in the three groups: 9%, 7%, and 8%.[74][Level of evidence A1] A QOL substudy was conducted with 2,100 participants and showed nearly identical patient-reported outcomes in each of the three arms at 2 years after study entry (median follow-up, 50 months).[73][Level of evidence A3] The primary patient-reported outcome was bowel bother.  Frequency of moderate bother was 5%, 6%, and 5% in the three study groups.  Severe bother was reported in less than 1% of men in each study group. Likewise, there were no differences in any of the secondary outcomes, which included  overall QOL, overall urinary bother, or overall sexual bother. The primary end point, 5-year relapse-free survival, was similar in the two study arms: 80.5% (95% CI, 75.7%–84.4%) with hypofractionation versus 77.1% (95% CI, 71.9%–81.5%), with conventional fractionation (HR, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.63–1.16; P = .36).[76][Level of evidence B1]  The overall 5-year survival rate in the two arms was also similar: 86.2% (95% CI, 82.3%–89.4%) with hypofractionation versus 85.9% (95% CI, 81.8%–89.2%) with conventional fractionation (HR, 1.02;  95% CI, 0.71–1.46; P = .92).[76][Level of evidence A1] With respect to toxicity (key end points of genitourinary [GU] or gastrointestinal [GI] grade 2+  toxicities at 3 years), noninferiority for hypofractionated radiation therapy could not be established after a median follow-up of 5 years: cumulative GU toxicity of 41.3% with hypofractionated radiation therapy versus 39% with conventional radiation therapy doses (HR, 1.16; 90% CI, 0.98–1.38); GI toxicity of 21.9% versus 17.7% (HR, 1.19; 90% CI, 0.93–1.52). Cumulative GU grade 3+ toxicity was higher in the hypofractionation group: 19.0% versus 12.9% (P = .02). Stool frequency (≥6 qd) was higher in the hypofractionation group: 7% versus 3% (P = .034). In a substudy of 322 men who had a baseline assessment and at least one follow-up assessment, and either no or short-term androgen therapy, erectile dysfunction was similar between the two study arms during 3 years of follow-up.[77] After a median follow-up of 5.8 years, the hypofractionated radiation therapy arm met the prospective noninferiority criterion with respect to DFS: 86.3% with hypofractionated radiation therapy versus 85.3% with conventional radiation therapy doses (consistent with HR, <1.52; P < .001 for the hypothesis of noninferiority).[78][Level of evidence B1] There were 49 deaths in the hypofractionated radiation therapy arm and 51 deaths in the conventional radiation therapy doses arm (HR for OS, 0.95; conventional radiation therapy doses vs. hypofractionated radiation therapy; 95% CI, 0.64–1.41). However, late GI grade 2+ toxicity was worse in the hypofractionated radiation therapy arm: 22.4% versus 14.0% (P = .002); there was also a trend toward worse late GU grade 2+ toxicity: 29.7% versus 22.8% (P = .06). After a median follow-up of 6 years (maximum 10 years), the primary end point of biochemical clinical failure (87%, PSA failure) was nearly identical with each radiation therapy schedule (85% in both arms; [DFS, 95% CI, 82%–88%]; HR, 0.96; 90% CI, 0.77–1.20).[79][Level of evidence B1] The trial was severely underpowered to detect any differences in overall or prostate-specific mortality.  Only 12 deaths in the conventional radiation therapy arm and 10 deaths in the hypofractionated radiation therapy arm were from prostate cancer. Only 14% of all deaths were attributed to prostate cancer. Short- and long-term genitourinary and gastrointestinal toxicities were similar in both study groups. Patients undergoing brachytherapy are often  selected for favorable characteristics that include the following: Low Gleason score. Low PSA level. Stage T1 to T2 tumors. More information and further study are required to better define the effects of modern interstitial brachytherapy on disease control and QOL and to determine the contribution of favorable patient selection to outcomes.[80][Level of evidence C3] Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Radium Ra 223 (223Ra) emits alpha particles (i.e., two protons and two neutrons bound together, identical to a helium nucleus) with a half-life of 11.4 days.  It is administered intravenously and selectively taken up by newly formed bone stroma.  The high-energy alpha particles have a short range of less than 100 mcM.  223Ra  improved OS in patients with prostate cancer metastatic to bone.  In a double-blind, randomized, controlled trial, 921 men with symptomatic castration-resistant prostate cancer, two or more metastases, and no known visceral metastases were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to 223Ra versus placebo.  223Ra statistically significantly improved OS (median 14.9 months vs. 11.3 months), rate of symptomatic skeletal events (33% vs. 38%), and spinal cord compression (4% vs. 7%).[81,82][Level of evidence A1] With administration  at a dose of 50kBq per kg body weight every 4 weeks for six injections, the side effects were similar to those of a placebo. Definitive EBRT can result in acute cystitis,
proctitis, and enteritis.[20,42,49,83-85]  These conditions are generally reversible
but may be chronic and rarely require surgical intervention.[85] A cross-sectional survey of patients with prostate cancer
who had been treated in a managed care setting by radical prostatectomy,
radiation therapy, or watchful waiting and active surveillance showed substantial sexual and urinary
dysfunction in the radiation therapy group.[46] Radiation is also carcinogenic.[86-88]  EBRT for prostate cancer is associated with an increased risk of  bladder and gastrointestinal cancer. Brachytherapy is associated with an increased risk of  bladder cancer. Potency, in most cases, is preserved with radiation therapy in the short term  but appears to
diminish over time.[85] Sildenafil citrate may be effective in the management of sexual dysfunction after radiation therapy in some men. Evidence (reducing complications): In a completed, randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover design study (RTOG-0215 [NCT00057759]) of 60 men who had undergone radiation therapy for clinically localized prostate cancer, and who reported erectile dysfunction that began after their radiation therapy, 55% reported successful intercourse after sildenafil versus 18% after placebo (P < .001).[89][Level of evidence A3] A randomized trial (RTOG-0831 [NCT00931528]) of 121 men with intact erectile function compared daily preventive tadalafil (5 mg PO qd) with placebo for 24 weeks beginning at the start of either EBRT or brachytherapy.[90][Level of evidence A3] There were no statistically significant differences in spontaneous erectile function (the primary end point) or any other measures of sexual function. There were no statistically significant differences in spontaneous erectile function (the primary end point) or any other measures of sexual function. Morbidity may be reduced with the employment of sophisticated radiation therapy techniques—such as the use of linear accelerators—and careful simulation and treatment planning.[91,92] Evidence (3D conformal vs. conventional radiation therapy): The side effects of similar doses of 3D conformal radiation therapy and conventional radiation therapy (total dose, 60–64 Gy) have been compared in a
randomized nonblinded study.[92][Level of evidence A3]  No
differences were observed in acute morbidity, and late side effects serious enough to require
hospitalization were infrequent with both techniques; however, the cumulative
incidence of mild or greater proctitis was lower in the conformal radiation arm than in
the standard therapy arm (37% vs. 56%; P = .004).  Urinary symptoms were
similar in the two treatment groups, as were local tumor control and OS rates
at 5 years of follow-up. No
differences were observed in acute morbidity, and late side effects serious enough to require
hospitalization were infrequent with both techniques; however, the cumulative
incidence of mild or greater proctitis was lower in the conformal radiation arm than in
the standard therapy arm (37% vs. 56%; P = .004).  Urinary symptoms were
similar in the two treatment groups, as were local tumor control and OS rates
at 5 years of follow-up. Radiation therapy can be delivered after an
extraperitoneal lymph node dissection without an increase in complications if
careful attention is paid to radiation technique.  The treatment field should
not include the area that contained the dissected pelvic nodes.  Previous TURP is associated with an increased risk of stricture above that seen with radiation
therapy alone, but, if radiation therapy is delayed 4 to 6 weeks after the TURP, the risk of
stricture is lower.[93-95]  Pretreatment TURP to relieve
obstructive symptoms has been associated with tumor dissemination; however, multivariable
analysis in pathologically staged cases indicates that this may be due to a worse
underlying prognosis of the cases that require TURP rather
than the result of the procedure itself.[96] In general, radical prostatectomy is associated with a higher rate of urinary incontinence and early sexual impotence but a lower rate of stool incontinence and rectal injury. However, over time, the differences in sexual impotence diminish because the risk rises with time since radiation.   Many side effects of definitive local therapy for prostate cancer persist well beyond a decade after therapy, and urinary problems in addition to sexual impotence may worsen with age.[97] Evidence (complications of radical prostatectomy vs. radiation therapy): A population-based survey of Medicare recipients who had received radiation
therapy as primary treatment for prostate cancer (similar in design to the
survey of Medicare patients who underwent radical prostatectomy,[44] described above) has been reported, showing substantial differences in posttreatment
morbidity profiles between surgery and radiation therapy.[98]Although the men who had
undergone radiation therapy were older at the time of initial therapy, they were less
likely to report the need for pads or clamps to control urinary wetness (7%
vs. >30%).A larger proportion of patients treated with radiation
therapy before surgery reported the ability to have an erection sufficient for
intercourse in the month before the survey (men <70 years, 33% who
received radiation therapy vs. 11% who underwent surgery alone; men ≥70 years, 27% who received radiation therapy vs. 12% who underwent surgery alone).Men receiving radiation therapy, however,  were more likely to report problems with bowel
function, especially frequent bowel movements (10% vs. 3%).As in the results of the
surgical patient survey, about 24% of patients who received radiation reported additional
subsequent treatment for  known or suspected cancer persistence or recurrence
within 3 years of primary therapy. A prospective, community-based cohort study of men aged 55 to 74 years treated with
radical prostatectomy (n = 1,156) or EBRT (n = 435)
attempted to compare the acute and chronic complications of the two treatment
strategies after adjusting for baseline differences in patient characteristics
and underlying health.[99]Regarding acute treatment-related morbidity,
radical prostatectomy was associated with higher rates of cardiopulmonary
complications (5.5% vs. 1.9%) and  the need for treatment of urinary
strictures (17.4% vs. 7.2%).  Radiation therapy was associated with more acute
rectal proctitis (18.7% vs. 1.6%).With regard to chronic treatment-related
morbidity, radical prostatectomy was associated with more urinary incontinence
(9.6% vs. 3.5%) and impotence (80% vs. 62%).  Radiation therapy was associated
with slightly greater declines in bowel function. Although the men who had
undergone radiation therapy were older at the time of initial therapy, they were less
likely to report the need for pads or clamps to control urinary wetness (7%
vs. >30%). A larger proportion of patients treated with radiation
therapy before surgery reported the ability to have an erection sufficient for
intercourse in the month before the survey (men <70 years, 33% who
received radiation therapy vs. 11% who underwent surgery alone; men ≥70 years, 27% who received radiation therapy vs. 12% who underwent surgery alone). Men receiving radiation therapy, however,  were more likely to report problems with bowel
function, especially frequent bowel movements (10% vs. 3%). As in the results of the
surgical patient survey, about 24% of patients who received radiation reported additional
subsequent treatment for  known or suspected cancer persistence or recurrence
within 3 years of primary therapy. Regarding acute treatment-related morbidity,
radical prostatectomy was associated with higher rates of cardiopulmonary
complications (5.5% vs. 1.9%) and  the need for treatment of urinary
strictures (17.4% vs. 7.2%).  Radiation therapy was associated with more acute
rectal proctitis (18.7% vs. 1.6%). With regard to chronic treatment-related
morbidity, radical prostatectomy was associated with more urinary incontinence
(9.6% vs. 3.5%) and impotence (80% vs. 62%).  Radiation therapy was associated
with slightly greater declines in bowel function. Several different hormonal approaches are used in the management of various stages of prostate cancer. These approaches include the following: Abiraterone acetate (added to androgen deprivation therapy [ADT]). Bilateral orchiectomy. Estrogen therapy. Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH)  agonist therapy. Antiandrogen therapy. ADT. Antiadrenal therapy.Ketoconazole. Aminoglutethimide. Ketoconazole. Aminoglutethimide. Abiraterone acetate has been shown to improve OS when added to ADT in men with advanced prostate cancer who have castration-sensitive disease. Abiraterone acetate is generally well-tolerated; however,  it is associated with an increase in the mineralocorticoid effects of grade 3 or 4 hypertension and hypokalemia compared with ADT alone.[100] It may also be associated with a small increase in respiratory disorders.[101] Benefits of bilateral orchiectomy include the following:[42] Ease of the procedure. Compliance. Immediacy in lowering testosterone levels. Low cost relative to the other forms of ADT. Disadvantages of bilateral orchiectomy include the following:[42,102] Psychological effects. Loss of libido. Less reversible impotence. Hot flashes. Osteoporosis.[102] Bilateral orchiectomy has also been associated with an elevated risk of coronary heart disease and myocardial infarction.[103-106] For more information, see Hot Flashes and Night Sweats. Estrogens at a dose of 3 mg qd of
diethylstilbestrol (DES) will achieve castrate levels of testosterone.  Like
orchiectomy, estrogens may cause loss of libido and impotence. Estrogens also cause gynecomastia, and prophylactic low-dose radiation therapy to the breasts is given to prevent this complication. DES is no longer manufactured or marketed in the United States and is seldom used today because of the risk of serious side effects, including myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular accidents, and pulmonary embolism. LH-RH agonists, such as leuprolide, goserelin, and buserelin, lower testosterone to castrate levels. Like orchiectomy and estrogens, LH-RH agonists cause impotence, hot flashes, and loss of libido. Tumor flare reactions may occur transiently but can be prevented by antiandrogens or short-term estrogens at a low dose for several weeks. There is some evidence that LH-RH agonists are associated with increased risk of cardiovascular morbidity or mortality, although the results are conflicting.[103-107] Evidence (LH-RH agonists and cardiovascular disease): In a population-based study within the Department of Veterans Affairs' system, LH-RH agonists were associated with an increased risk of diabetes as well as cardiovascular disease, including coronary heart disease, myocardial infarction, sudden death, and stroke.[103-105] A systematic evidence review and meta-analysis of eight trials (4,141 patients) of men with nonmetastatic prostate cancer who were randomly assigned to receive or not to receive  LH-RH agonists  found no difference in cardiovascular death rates (11.0% vs. 11.2%; RRdeath, 0.93; 95% CI, 0.79–1.10; P = .41).[108]  Median follow-up in those studies was 7.6 to 13.2 years.  No excess risk of LH-RH agonists was found regardless of treatment duration or patient age (median age of <70 years or ≥70 years). Antiandrogen agents used in the treatment of prostate cancer include flutamide and bicalutamide.  A systematic evidence review compared nonsteroidal antiandrogen monotherapy with surgical or medical castration from 11 randomized trials in 3,060 men with locally advanced, metastatic, or recurrent disease after local therapy.[109] Use of nonsteroidal antiandrogens as monotherapy decreased OS and increased the rate of clinical progression and treatment failure.[109][Level of evidence A1] The pure antiandrogen, flutamide, may cause diarrhea, breast tenderness, and nausea. Case reports show fatal and nonfatal liver toxic effects.[110] For more information, see Gastrointestinal Complications. Bicalutamide may cause nausea, breast tenderness, hot flashes, loss of libido, and impotence.[111]   For more information, see Nausea and Vomiting Related to Cancer Treatment and Hot Flashes and Night Sweats. The steroidal antiandrogen, megestrol acetate, suppresses androgen production incompletely and is generally not used as initial therapy. Additional studies that evaluate the effects of various hormone therapies on QOL are required.[112] A national Medicare survey of men who had undergone radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer and either had or had not undergone androgen depletion (either medically or surgically induced) showed a decrease with androgen depletion  in all seven health-related QOL measures, including the following:[113][Level of evidence C1] Impact of cancer and treatment. Concern regarding body image. Mental health. General health. Activity. Worries about cancer and dying. Energy. ADT can cause osteoporosis and bone fractures. In a population-based sample of 50,613 Medicare patients aged 66 years or older followed for a median of 5.1 years, men who had been treated with either a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) or orchiectomy had a 19.4% bone fracture rate compared with 12.6% in men who had not received hormone deprivation therapy. The effect was similar in men whether or not they had metastatic bone disease.[114] The use of ADT may be associated with complaints of penile shortening, although the data are very limited.[60] In a registry study  of men with rising PSA after initial treatment of clinically localized prostate cancer treated with radiation therapy plus ADT, 6 of 225 men (2.7%) complained of reduced penile size. Of the 213 men treated with radiation therapy but no ADT, none complained of changes in penile size.   However, the data were based upon physician reporting of patients' complaints rather than direct patient questioning or before-and-after measurement of penile length.  Also, the study sample was restricted to patients with known or suspected tumor recurrence, making generalization difficult. Placebo-controlled, randomized trials have shown that treatment of bone loss with bisphosphonates decreases the risk of bone fracture in men receiving ADT for prostate cancer (RR, 0.80 in a meta-analysis of 15 trials; 95% CI, 0.69–0.94). In the meta-analysis, zoledronate appeared to have the largest effect.[115] The use of ADT has also been associated with an increased risk of colorectal cancer. Evidence (increased risk of colorectal cancer): Using the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)  Medicare database, investigators assessed the risk of subsequent colorectal cancer in 107,859 men aged 67 years and older after an initial diagnosis of prostate cancer.[116]The rates of colorectal cancer per 1,000 person-years were 6.3 (95% CI, 5.3–7.5) in men who had orchiectomy, 4.4 (95% CI, 4.0–4.9) in men treated with GnRH agonists, and 3.7 (95% CI, 3.5–3.9) in men who had no androgen deprivation.In men treated with GnRH agonists, the risk increased with increasing duration of treatment (P for trend = .01). The rates of colorectal cancer per 1,000 person-years were 6.3 (95% CI, 5.3–7.5) in men who had orchiectomy, 4.4 (95% CI, 4.0–4.9) in men treated with GnRH agonists, and 3.7 (95% CI, 3.5–3.9) in men who had no androgen deprivation. In men treated with GnRH agonists, the risk increased with increasing duration of treatment (P for trend = .01). Antiadrenal agents used in the treatment of prostate cancer include ketoconazole and aminoglutethimide. Long-term use of ketoconazole can result in impotence, pruritus, nail changes, and adrenal insufficiency. Aminoglutethimide commonly causes sedation and skin rashes. For more information, see Pruritus. Cryosurgery, or cryotherapy, is under evaluation for the treatment of localized prostate cancer. It is a surgical technique that involves destruction of prostate cancer cells by intermittent freezing of the prostate with cryoprobes, followed by thawing.[117][Level of evidence C1]; [118,119][Level of evidence C3] There is limited evidence regarding its efficacy and safety compared with standard prostatectomy and radiation therapy, and the technique is evolving in an attempt to reduce local toxicity and normal tissue damage. The quality of evidence on efficacy is low, currently limited to case series of relatively small size, short follow-up, and surrogate outcomes of efficacy.[120] Serious toxic effects associated with cryosurgery include bladder outlet injury, urinary incontinence, sexual impotence, and rectal injury. Impotence is common, ranging from about 47% to 100%. The frequency of other side effects and the probability of cancer control at 5 years' follow-up have varied among reporting centers, and series are small compared with surgery and radiation therapy.[118,119]   Other major complications include urethral sloughing, urinary fistula or stricture, and bladder neck obstruction.[120] There is interest in the use of proton-beam therapy for the treatment of prostate cancer. Although the dose distribution of this form of charged-particle radiation could theoretically improve the therapeutic ratio of prostate radiation, allowing for an increase in dose to the tumor without a substantial increase in side effects, no randomized controlled trials have been reported that compare its efficacy and toxicity with those of other forms of radiation therapy. Vascular-targeted photodynamic therapy using a photosensitizing agent has been tested in men with low-risk prostate cancer.[121] The role of neoadjuvant hormonal therapy is not established.[26,27] Bicalutamide has not been shown to improve OS in patients with localized or locally advanced prostate cancer. Evidence (bicalutamide): The Early Prostate Cancer program is a large, randomized, placebo-controlled, international trial that compared bicalutamide (150 mg PO qd) plus standard care (radical prostatectomy, radiation therapy, or watchful waiting, depending on local custom) with standard care alone for men with nonmetastatic localized or locally advanced prostate cancer (T1–2, N0, and NX; T3–4, any N; or any T, N+). Less than 2% of the 8,113 men had known nodal disease.[122][Level of evidence A1] At a median follow-up of 7.4 years, there was no difference in OS between the bicalutamide and placebo groups (about 76% in both arms [HR, 0.99; CI, 95%, 0.91–1.09; P = .89]). At a median follow-up of 7.4 years, there was no difference in OS between the bicalutamide and placebo groups (about 76% in both arms [HR, 0.99; CI, 95%, 0.91–1.09; P = .89]). Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Barocas DA, Alvarez J, Resnick MJ, et al.: Association Between Radiation Therapy, Surgery, or Observation for Localized Prostate Cancer and Patient-Reported Outcomes After 3 Years. JAMA 317 (11): 1126-1140, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Chen RC, Basak R, Meyer AM, et al.: Association Between Choice of Radical Prostatectomy, External Beam Radiotherapy, Brachytherapy, or Active Surveillance and Patient-Reported Quality of Life Among Men With Localized Prostate Cancer. JAMA 317 (11): 1141-1150, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Chodak GW, Thisted RA, Gerber GS, et al.: Results of conservative management of clinically localized prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 330 (4): 242-8, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Whitmore WF: Expectant management of clinically localized prostatic cancer. Semin Oncol 21 (5): 560-8, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Wilt TJ, Brawer MK, Jones KM, et al.: Radical prostatectomy versus observation for localized prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 367 (3): 203-13, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Shappley WV, Kenfield SA, Kasperzyk JL, et al.: Prospective study of determinants and outcomes of deferred treatment or watchful waiting among men with prostate cancer in a nationwide cohort. J Clin Oncol 27 (30): 4980-5, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Klotz L: Active surveillance with selective delayed intervention: using natural history to guide treatment in good risk prostate cancer. J Urol 172 (5 Pt 2): S48-50; discussion S50-1, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Carter HB, Walsh PC, Landis P, et al.: Expectant management of nonpalpable prostate cancer with curative intent: preliminary results. J Urol 167 (3): 1231-4, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Klotz L, Vesprini D, Sethukavalan P, et al.: Long-term follow-up of a large active surveillance cohort of patients with prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 33 (3): 272-7, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Johansson JE, Holmberg L, Johansson S, et al.: Fifteen-year survival in prostate cancer. A prospective, population-based study in Sweden. JAMA 277 (6): 467-71, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Johansson JE, Andrén O, Andersson SO, et al.: Natural history of early, localized prostate cancer. JAMA 291 (22): 2713-9, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Waaler G, Stenwig AE: Prognosis of localised prostatic cancer managed by "watch and wait" policy. Br J Urol 72 (2): 214-9, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Lu-Yao GL, Albertsen PC, Moore DF, et al.: Outcomes of localized prostate cancer following conservative management. JAMA 302 (11): 1202-9, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Stattin P, Holmberg E, Johansson JE, et al.: Outcomes in localized prostate cancer: National Prostate Cancer Register of Sweden follow-up study. J Natl Cancer Inst 102 (13): 950-8, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Holmström B, Holmberg E, Egevad L, et al.: Outcome of primary versus deferred radical prostatectomy in the National Prostate Cancer Register of Sweden Follow-Up Study. J Urol 184 (4): 1322-7, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Barry MJ, Albertsen PC, Bagshaw MA, et al.: Outcomes for men with clinically nonmetastatic prostate carcinoma managed with radical prostactectomy, external beam radiotherapy, or expectant management: a retrospective analysis. Cancer 91 (12): 2302-14, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Lu-Yao GL, Yao SL: Population-based study of long-term survival in patients with clinically localised prostate cancer. Lancet 349 (9056): 906-10, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] van den Bergh RC, Roemeling S, Roobol MJ, et al.: Outcomes of men with screen-detected prostate cancer eligible for active surveillance who were managed expectantly. Eur Urol 55 (1): 1-8, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Hamdy FC, Donovan JL, Lane JA, et al.: 10-Year Outcomes after Monitoring, Surgery, or Radiotherapy for Localized Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 375 (15): 1415-1424, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Catalona WJ, Bigg SW: Nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy: evaluation of results after 250 patients. J Urol 143 (3): 538-43; discussion 544, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Corral DA, Bahnson RR: Survival of men with clinically localized prostate cancer detected in the eighth decade of life. J Urol 151 (5): 1326-9, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Zincke H, Bergstralh EJ, Blute ML, et al.: Radical prostatectomy for clinically localized prostate cancer: long-term results of 1,143 patients from a single institution. J Clin Oncol 12 (11): 2254-63, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Schuessler WW, Vancaillie TG, Reich H, et al.: Transperitoneal endosurgical lymphadenectomy in patients with localized prostate cancer. J Urol 145 (5): 988-91, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Coughlin GD, Yaxley JW, Chambers SK, et al.: Robot-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy versus open radical retropubic prostatectomy: 24-month outcomes from a randomised controlled study. Lancet Oncol 19 (8): 1051-1060, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Fournier GR, Narayan P: Re-evaluation of the need for pelvic lymphadenectomy in low grade prostate cancer. Br J Urol 72 (4): 484-8, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Witjes WP, Schulman CC, Debruyne FM: Preliminary results of a prospective randomized study comparing radical prostatectomy versus radical prostatectomy associated with neoadjuvant hormonal combination therapy in T2-3 N0 M0 prostatic carcinoma. The European Study Group on Neoadjuvant Treatment of Prostate Cancer. Urology 49 (3A Suppl): 65-9, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Fair WR, Cookson MS, Stroumbakis N, et al.: The indications, rationale, and results of neoadjuvant androgen deprivation in the treatment of prostatic cancer: Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center results. Urology 49 (3A Suppl): 46-55, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Adolfsson J, Rönström L, Löwhagen T, et al.: Deferred treatment of clinically localized low grade prostate cancer: the experience from a prospective series at the Karolinska Hospital. J Urol 152 (5 Pt 2): 1757-60, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Grossfeld GD, Chang JJ, Broering JM, et al.: Impact of positive surgical margins on prostate cancer recurrence and the use of secondary cancer treatment: data from the CaPSURE database. J Urol 163 (4): 1171-7; quiz 1295, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Wasson JH, Cushman CC, Bruskewitz RC, et al.: A structured literature review of treatment for localized prostate cancer. Prostate Disease Patient Outcome Research Team. Arch Fam Med 2 (5): 487-93, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Adolfsson J, Steineck G, Whitmore WF: Recent results of management of palpable clinically localized prostate cancer. Cancer 72 (2): 310-22, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Austenfeld MS, Thompson IM, Middleton RG: Meta-analysis of the literature: guideline development for prostate cancer treatment. American Urological Association Prostate Cancer Guideline Panel. J Urol 152 (5 Pt 2): 1866-9, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Holmberg L, Bill-Axelson A, Helgesen F, et al.: A randomized trial comparing radical prostatectomy with watchful waiting in early prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 347 (11): 781-9, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Bill-Axelson A, Holmberg L, Ruutu M, et al.: Radical prostatectomy versus watchful waiting in early prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 352 (19): 1977-84, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Bill-Axelson A, Holmberg L, Garmo H, et al.: Radical prostatectomy or watchful waiting in early prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 370 (10): 932-42, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Wilt TJ: The Prostate Cancer Intervention Versus Observation Trial: VA/NCI/AHRQ Cooperative Studies Program #407 (PIVOT): design and baseline results of a randomized controlled trial comparing radical prostatectomy with watchful waiting for men with clinically localized prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 2012 (45): 184-90, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Wilt TJ, Jones KM, Barry MJ, et al.: Follow-up of Prostatectomy versus Observation for Early Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 377 (2): 132-142, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Donovan JL, Hamdy FC, Lane JA, et al.: Patient-Reported Outcomes after Monitoring, Surgery, or Radiotherapy for Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 375 (15): 1425-1437, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Yao SL, Lu-Yao G: Population-based study of relationships between hospital volume of prostatectomies, patient outcomes, and length of hospital stay. J Natl Cancer Inst 91 (22): 1950-6, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Lu-Yao GL, McLerran D, Wasson J, et al.: An assessment of radical prostatectomy. Time trends, geographic variation, and outcomes. The Prostate Patient Outcomes Research Team. JAMA 269 (20): 2633-6, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Alibhai SM, Leach M, Tomlinson G, et al.: 30-day mortality and major complications after radical prostatectomy: influence of age and comorbidity. J Natl Cancer Inst 97 (20): 1525-32, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Sanda MG, Dunn RL, Michalski J, et al.: Quality of life and satisfaction with outcome among prostate-cancer survivors. N Engl J Med 358 (12): 1250-61, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Catalona WJ, Basler JW: Return of erections and urinary continence following nerve sparing radical retropubic prostatectomy. J Urol 150 (3): 905-7, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Fowler FJ, Barry MJ, Lu-Yao G, et al.: Patient-reported complications and follow-up treatment after radical prostatectomy. The National Medicare Experience: 1988-1990 (updated June 1993). Urology 42 (6): 622-9, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Potosky AL, Davis WW, Hoffman RM, et al.: Five-year outcomes after prostatectomy or radiotherapy for prostate cancer: the prostate cancer outcomes study. J Natl Cancer Inst 96 (18): 1358-67, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Litwin MS, Hays RD, Fink A, et al.: Quality-of-life outcomes in men treated for localized prostate cancer. JAMA 273 (2): 129-35, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Jønler M, Messing EM, Rhodes PR, et al.: Sequelae of radical prostatectomy. Br J Urol 74 (3): 352-8, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Geary ES, Dendinger TE, Freiha FS, et al.: Nerve sparing radical prostatectomy: a different view. J Urol 154 (1): 145-9, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Lim AJ, Brandon AH, Fiedler J, et al.: Quality of life: radical prostatectomy versus radiation therapy for prostate cancer. J Urol 154 (4): 1420-5, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Savoie M, Kim SS, Soloway MS: A prospective study measuring penile length in men treated with radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer. J Urol 169 (4): 1462-4, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Gontero P, Galzerano M, Bartoletti R, et al.: New insights into the pathogenesis of penile shortening after radical prostatectomy and the role of postoperative sexual function. J Urol 178 (2): 602-7, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] McCullough A: Penile change following radical prostatectomy: size, smooth muscle atrophy, and curve. Curr Urol Rep 9 (6): 492-9, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Sun M, Lughezzani G, Alasker A, et al.: Comparative study of inguinal hernia repair after radical prostatectomy, prostate biopsy, transurethral resection of the prostate or pelvic lymph node dissection. J Urol 183 (3): 970-5, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Sekita N, Suzuki H, Kamijima S, et al.: Incidence of inguinal hernia after prostate surgery: open radical retropubic prostatectomy versus open simple prostatectomy versus transurethral resection of the prostate. Int J Urol 16 (1): 110-3, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Lughezzani G, Sun M, Perrotte P, et al.: Comparative study of inguinal hernia repair rates after radical prostatectomy or external beam radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 78 (5): 1307-13, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Lodding P, Bergdahl C, Nyberg M, et al.: Inguinal hernia after radical retropubic prostatectomy for prostate cancer: a study of incidence and risk factors in comparison to no operation and lymphadenectomy. J Urol 166 (3): 964-7, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Lepor H, Robbins D: Inguinal hernias in men undergoing open radical retropubic prostatectomy. Urology 70 (5): 961-4, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Bishoff JT, Motley G, Optenberg SA, et al.: Incidence of fecal and urinary incontinence following radical perineal and retropubic prostatectomy in a national population. J Urol 160 (2): 454-8, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Nossiter J, Sujenthiran A, Charman SC, et al.: Robot-assisted radical prostatectomy vs laparoscopic and open retropubic radical prostatectomy: functional outcomes 18 months after diagnosis from a national cohort study in England. Br J Cancer 118 (4): 489-494, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Parekh A, Chen MH, Hoffman KE, et al.: Reduced penile size and treatment regret in men with recurrent prostate cancer after surgery, radiotherapy plus androgen deprivation, or radiotherapy alone. Urology 81 (1): 130-4, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Kadono Y, Machioka K, Nakashima K, et al.: Changes in penile length after radical prostatectomy: investigation of the underlying anatomical mechanism. BJU Int 120 (2): 293-299, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Forman JD, Order SE, Zinreich ES, et al.: Carcinoma of the prostate in the elderly: the therapeutic ratio of definitive radiotherapy. J Urol 136 (6): 1238-41, 1986. [PUBMED Abstract] Duncan W, Warde P, Catton CN, et al.: Carcinoma of the prostate: results of radical radiotherapy (1970-1985) Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 26 (2): 203-10, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Zietman AL, Coen JJ, Shipley WU, et al.: Radical radiation therapy in the management of prostatic adenocarcinoma: the initial prostate specific antigen value as a predictor of treatment outcome. J Urol 151 (3): 640-5, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Peeters ST, Heemsbergen WD, Koper PC, et al.: Dose-response in radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer: results of the Dutch multicenter randomized phase III trial comparing 68 Gy of radiotherapy with 78 Gy. J Clin Oncol 24 (13): 1990-6, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Zietman AL, DeSilvio ML, Slater JD, et al.: Comparison of conventional-dose vs high-dose conformal radiation therapy in clinically localized adenocarcinoma of the prostate: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 294 (10): 1233-9, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Pollack A, Zagars GK, Starkschall G, et al.: Prostate cancer radiation dose response: results of the M. D. Anderson phase III randomized trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 53 (5): 1097-105, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Dearnaley DP, Jovic G, Syndikus I, et al.: Escalated-dose versus control-dose conformal radiotherapy for prostate cancer: long-term results from the MRC RT01 randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol 15 (4): 464-73, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Michalski JM, Moughan J, Purdy J, et al.: Effect of Standard vs Dose-Escalated Radiation Therapy for Patients With Intermediate-Risk Prostate Cancer: The NRG Oncology RTOG 0126 Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Oncol 4 (6): e180039, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Asbell SO, Martz KL, Shin KH, et al.: Impact of surgical staging in evaluating the radiotherapeutic outcome in RTOG #77-06, a phase III study for T1BN0M0 (A2) and T2N0M0 (B) prostate carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 40 (4): 769-82, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Yu JB: Hypofractionated Radiotherapy for Prostate Cancer: Further Evidence to Tip the Scales. J Clin Oncol 35 (17): 1867-1869, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Pollack A, Walker G, Horwitz EM, et al.: Randomized trial of hypofractionated external-beam radiotherapy for prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 31 (31): 3860-8, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Wilkins A, Mossop H, Syndikus I, et al.: Hypofractionated radiotherapy versus conventionally fractionated radiotherapy for patients with intermediate-risk localised prostate cancer: 2-year patient-reported outcomes of the randomised, non-inferiority, phase 3 CHHiP trial. Lancet Oncol 16 (16): 1605-16, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Dearnaley D, Syndikus I, Mossop H, et al.: Conventional versus hypofractionated high-dose intensity-modulated radiotherapy for prostate cancer: 5-year outcomes of the randomised, non-inferiority, phase 3 CHHiP trial. Lancet Oncol 17 (8): 1047-60, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Aluwini S, Pos F, Schimmel E, et al.: Hypofractionated versus conventionally fractionated radiotherapy for patients with prostate cancer (HYPRO): late toxicity results from a randomised, non-inferiority, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 17 (4): 464-74, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Incrocci L, Wortel RC, Alemayehu WG, et al.: Hypofractionated versus conventionally fractionated radiotherapy for patients with localised prostate cancer (HYPRO): final efficacy results from a randomised, multicentre, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 17 (8): 1061-9, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Wortel RC, Pos FJ, Heemsbergen WD, et al.: Sexual Function After Hypofractionated Versus Conventionally Fractionated Radiotherapy for Prostate Cancer: Results From the Randomized Phase III HYPRO Trial. J Sex Med 13 (11): 1695-1703, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Lee WR, Dignam JJ, Amin MB, et al.: Randomized Phase III Noninferiority Study Comparing Two Radiotherapy Fractionation Schedules in Patients With Low-Risk Prostate Cancer. J Clin Oncol 34 (20): 2325-32, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Catton CN, Lukka H, Gu CS, et al.: Randomized Trial of a Hypofractionated Radiation Regimen for the Treatment of Localized Prostate Cancer. J Clin Oncol 35 (17): 1884-1890, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Ragde H, Blasko JC, Grimm PD, et al.: Interstitial iodine-125 radiation without adjuvant therapy in the treatment of clinically localized prostate carcinoma. Cancer 80 (3): 442-53, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Parker C, Nilsson S, Heinrich D, et al.: Alpha emitter radium-223 and survival in metastatic prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 369 (3): 213-23, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Sartor O, Coleman R, Nilsson S, et al.: Effect of radium-223 dichloride on symptomatic skeletal events in patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer and bone metastases: results from a phase 3, double-blind, randomised trial. Lancet Oncol 15 (7): 738-46, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Schellhammer PF, Jordan GH, el-Mahdi AM: Pelvic complications after interstitial and external beam irradiation of urologic and gynecologic malignancy. World J Surg 10 (2): 259-68, 1986. [PUBMED Abstract] Lee JY, Daignault-Newton S, Heath G, et al.: Multinational Prospective Study of Patient-Reported Outcomes After Prostate Radiation Therapy: Detailed Assessment of Rectal Bleeding. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 96 (4): 770-777, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Hamilton AS, Stanford JL, Gilliland FD, et al.: Health outcomes after external-beam radiation therapy for clinically localized prostate cancer: results from the Prostate Cancer Outcomes Study. J Clin Oncol 19 (9): 2517-26, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Nieder AM, Porter MP, Soloway MS: Radiation therapy for prostate cancer increases subsequent risk of bladder and rectal cancer: a population based cohort study. J Urol 180 (5): 2005-9; discussion 2009-10, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Abdel-Wahab M, Reis IM, Wu J, et al.: Second primary cancer risk of radiation therapy after radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer: an analysis of SEER data. Urology 74 (4): 866-71, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Nam RK, Cheung P, Herschorn S, et al.: Incidence of complications other than urinary incontinence or erectile dysfunction after radical prostatectomy or radiotherapy for prostate cancer: a population-based cohort study. Lancet Oncol 15 (2): 223-31, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Incrocci L, Koper PC, Hop WC, et al.: Sildenafil citrate (Viagra) and erectile dysfunction following external beam radiotherapy for prostate cancer: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 51 (5): 1190-5, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Pisansky TM, Pugh SL, Greenberg RE, et al.: Tadalafil for prevention of erectile dysfunction after radiotherapy for prostate cancer: the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group [0831] randomized clinical trial. JAMA 311 (13): 1300-7, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Hanks GE, Hanlon AL, Schultheiss TE, et al.: Dose escalation with 3D conformal treatment: five year outcomes, treatment optimization, and future directions. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 41 (3): 501-10, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Dearnaley DP, Khoo VS, Norman AR, et al.: Comparison of radiation side-effects of conformal and conventional radiotherapy in prostate cancer: a randomised trial. Lancet 353 (9149): 267-72, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Greskovich FJ, Zagars GK, Sherman NE, et al.: Complications following external beam radiation therapy for prostate cancer: an analysis of patients treated with and without staging pelvic lymphadenectomy. J Urol 146 (3): 798-802, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Seymore CH, el-Mahdi AM, Schellhammer PF: The effect of prior transurethral resection of the prostate on post radiation urethral strictures and bladder neck contractures. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 12 (9): 1597-600, 1986. [PUBMED Abstract] Green N, Treible D, Wallack H, et al.: Prostate cancer--the impact of irradiation on urinary outlet obstruction. Br J Urol 70 (3): 310-3, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Zelefsky MJ, Whitmore WF, Leibel SA, et al.: Impact of transurethral resection on the long-term outcome of patients with prostatic carcinoma. J Urol 150 (6): 1860-4, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Jang JW, Drumm MR, Efstathiou JA, et al.: Long-term quality of life after definitive treatment for prostate cancer: patient-reported outcomes in the second posttreatment decade. Cancer Med 6 (7): 1827-1836, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Fowler FJ, Barry MJ, Lu-Yao G, et al.: Outcomes of external-beam radiation therapy for prostate cancer: a study of Medicare beneficiaries in three surveillance, epidemiology, and end results areas. J Clin Oncol 14 (8): 2258-65, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Potosky AL, Legler J, Albertsen PC, et al.: Health outcomes after prostatectomy or radiotherapy for prostate cancer: results from the Prostate Cancer Outcomes Study. J Natl Cancer Inst 92 (19): 1582-92, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Fizazi K, Tran N, Fein L, et al.: Abiraterone plus Prednisone in Metastatic, Castration-Sensitive Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 377 (4): 352-360, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] James ND, de Bono JS, Spears MR, et al.: Abiraterone for Prostate Cancer Not Previously Treated with Hormone Therapy. N Engl J Med 377 (4): 338-351, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Daniell HW: Osteoporosis after orchiectomy for prostate cancer. J Urol 157 (2): 439-44, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Keating NL, O'Malley AJ, Freedland SJ, et al.: Diabetes and cardiovascular disease during androgen deprivation therapy: observational study of veterans with prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 102 (1): 39-46, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Keating NL, O'Malley AJ, Smith MR: Diabetes and cardiovascular disease during androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 24 (27): 4448-56, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] D'Amico AV, Denham JW, Crook J, et al.: Influence of androgen suppression therapy for prostate cancer on the frequency and timing of fatal myocardial infarctions. J Clin Oncol 25 (17): 2420-5, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] O'Farrell S, Garmo H, Holmberg L, et al.: Risk and timing of cardiovascular disease after androgen-deprivation therapy in men with prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 33 (11): 1243-51, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Levine GN, D'Amico AV, Berger P, et al.: Androgen-deprivation therapy in prostate cancer and cardiovascular risk: a science advisory from the American Heart Association, American Cancer Society, and American Urological Association: endorsed by the American Society for Radiation Oncology. CA Cancer J Clin 60 (3): 194-201, 2010 May-Jun. [PUBMED Abstract] Nguyen PL, Je Y, Schutz FA, et al.: Association of androgen deprivation therapy with cardiovascular death in patients with prostate cancer: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. JAMA 306 (21): 2359-66, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Kunath F, Grobe HR, Rücker G, et al.: Non-steroidal antiandrogen monotherapy compared with luteinising hormone-releasing hormone agonists or surgical castration monotherapy for advanced prostate cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev  (6): CD009266, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Wysowski DK, Freiman JP, Tourtelot JB, et al.: Fatal and nonfatal hepatotoxicity associated with flutamide. Ann Intern Med 118 (11): 860-4, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Soloway MS, Schellhammer PF, Smith JA, et al.: Bicalutamide in the treatment of advanced prostatic carcinoma: a phase II multicenter trial. Urology 47 (1A Suppl): 33-7; discussion 48-53, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Kirschenbaum A: Management of hormonal treatment effects. Cancer  75 (7 Suppl): 1983-86, 1995. Fowler FJ, McNaughton Collins M, Walker Corkery E, et al.: The impact of androgen deprivation on quality of life after radical prostatectomy for prostate carcinoma. Cancer 95 (2): 287-95, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Shahinian VB, Kuo YF, Freeman JL, et al.: Risk of fracture after androgen deprivation for prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 352 (2): 154-64, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Serpa Neto A, Tobias-Machado M, Esteves MA, et al.: Bisphosphonate therapy in patients under androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis 15 (1): 36-44, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Gillessen S, Templeton A, Marra G, et al.: Risk of colorectal cancer in men on long-term androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 102 (23): 1760-70, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Robinson JW, Saliken JC, Donnelly BJ, et al.: Quality-of-life outcomes for men treated with cryosurgery for localized prostate carcinoma. Cancer 86 (9): 1793-801, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Donnelly BJ, Saliken JC, Ernst DS, et al.: Prospective trial of cryosurgical ablation of the prostate: five-year results. Urology 60 (4): 645-9, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Aus G, Pileblad E, Hugosson J: Cryosurgical ablation of the prostate: 5-year follow-up of a prospective study. Eur Urol 42 (2): 133-8, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Shelley M, Wilt TJ, Coles B, et al.: Cryotherapy for localised prostate cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev  (3): CD005010, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Azzouzi AR, Vincendeau S, Barret E, et al.: Padeliporfin vascular-targeted photodynamic therapy versus active surveillance in men with low-risk prostate cancer (CLIN1001 PCM301): an open-label, phase 3, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol 18 (2): 181-191, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] McLeod DG, Iversen P, See WA, et al.: Bicalutamide 150 mg plus standard care vs standard care alone for early prostate cancer. BJU Int 97 (2): 247-54, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Overview Treatment Options for Stage I  Prostate Cancer Watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoringRadical prostatectomyExternal-beam radiation therapy (EBRT)Interstitial implantation of radioisotopesPhotodynamic therapy Current Clinical Trials Watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring Radical prostatectomy External-beam radiation therapy (EBRT) Interstitial implantation of radioisotopes Photodynamic therapy Stage I prostate cancer is defined by the American Joint Committee on Cancer's TNM (tumor, node, metastasis) classification system:[1] cT1a–c, N0, M0,  prostate-specific antigen (PSA) <10 ng/mL, Gleason ≤6. cT2a, N0, M0, PSA <10 ng/mL, Gleason ≤6. pT2, N0, M0, PSA <10 ng/mL, Gleason ≤6. The frequency of clinically silent, nonmetastatic prostate cancer that can be found at autopsy greatly increases with age and may be as high as 50% to 60% in men aged 90 years and older. Undoubtedly, the incidental discovery of these occult cancers at prostatic surgery performed for other reasons accounts for the similar survival of men with stage I prostate cancer, compared with the normal male population, adjusted for age. Many stage I cancers are well differentiated and only focally involve the gland (T1a, N0, M0); most require no treatment other than careful follow-up.[2] In younger patients (aged 50–60 years) whose expected survival is long, treatment should be considered.[3] Radical prostatectomy, external-beam radiation therapy (EBRT), interstitial implantation of radioisotopes, and watchful waiting and active surveillance/active monitoring  yield apparently similar survival rates in noncontrolled, selected series. The decision to treat should be made in the context of the patient’s age, associated medical illnesses, and personal desires.[3] Treatment options for patients with stage I prostate cancer   include the following: Watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring. Radical prostatectomy. External-beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Interstitial implantation of radioisotopes. High-intensity focused ultrasound therapy (under clinical evaluation).[4-7] Photodynamic therapy (under clinical evaluation). Asymptomatic patients of advanced age or with concomitant illness may warrant consideration of careful observation without immediate active treatment.[8-10] Watch and wait, observation, expectant management, and active surveillance/active monitoring are terms indicating a strategy that does not employ immediate therapy with curative intent. For more information, see the Watchful Waiting or Active Surveillance/Active Monitoring section. Evidence (observation with delayed hormonal therapy): In a retrospective pooled analysis, 828 men with clinically localized prostate cancer were managed by initial conservative therapy with subsequent hormonal therapy given at the time of symptomatic disease progression.This study showed that the patients with grade 1 or grade 2 tumors experienced a disease-specific survival of 87% at 10 years and that their overall survival (OS) closely approximated the expected survival among men of similar ages in the general population.[8] This study showed that the patients with grade 1 or grade 2 tumors experienced a disease-specific survival of 87% at 10 years and that their overall survival (OS) closely approximated the expected survival among men of similar ages in the general population.[8] Radical prostatectomy, usually with pelvic lymphadenectomy  (with or without
the nerve-sparing technique designed to preserve potency) is the most commonly applied therapy with curative intent.[11-13]  Radical
prostatectomy may be difficult after a transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP). Because about 40% to 50% of men with clinically organ-confined disease are found to have pathological extension beyond the prostate capsule or surgical margins, the role of postprostatectomy adjuvant radiation therapy has been studied. Consideration may also be given to postoperative radiation therapy (PORT) for patients who
are found to have seminal vesicle invasion by tumor at
the time of prostatectomy or who have a detectable level of PSA more than 3 weeks after surgery.[14-16] Because duration of follow-up
in available studies is still relatively short, the value of PORT has not been determined; however, PORT  does reduce local recurrence.[14] Careful treatment planning is
necessary to avoid morbidity. Evidence (radical prostatectomy followed by radiation therapy): In a randomized trial of 425 men with pathological T3, N0, and  M0 disease, postsurgical EBRT (60–64 Gy to the prostatic fossa over 30–32 fractions) was compared with observation.[15][Level of evidence A1]The primary end point, metastasis-free survival, could be affected by serial PSA monitoring and resulting metastatic work-up for PSA increase. This could have biased the primary end point in favor of radiation therapy, which was associated with a lower rate of PSA rise. Nevertheless, metastasis-free survival was not statistically different between the two study arms (P = .06). After a median follow-up of about 10.6 years, the overall median survival was 14.7 years in the radiation therapy group versus 13.8 years in the observation group (P = .16).Although the OS rates were not statistically different, complication rates were substantially higher in the radiation therapy group: overall complications were 23.8% versus 11.9%, rectal complications were 3.3% versus 0%, and urethral stricture was 17.8% versus 9.5%.After a median follow-up of about 12.5 years, however, OS was better in the radiation therapy arm; hazard ratio (HR)death,  0.72 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.55–0.96; P = .023). The 10-year estimated survival rates were 74% in the radiation therapy arm   and 66% in the control arm. The 10-year estimated metastasis-free survivals were 73% and 65% (P = .016).[16][Level of evidence A1] Another randomized trial came to a different conclusion with respect to the effect of postoperative radiation therapy on OS.[17][Level of evidence A1]  In the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) trial (EORTC-22911 [NCT00002511]), 1,005 men aged 75 years and younger  with clinical T0 to T3 prostate cancer were randomly assigned after prostatectomy to receive PORT (60 Gy) or observation, with subsequent therapy delayed until the occurrence of either biochemical or clinical relapse.  The recommended treatment for local recurrence was radiation.With a median follow-up of 10.6 years (up to 16.6 years), the biochemical progression-free survival (PFS) rates were higher in the observation study arm (60.6% vs. 41.1%; HR, 0.49; 95% CI, 0.41–0.59; P < .0001).  Locoregional relapse rates were 8.4% versus 17.3% in favor of immediate radiation (HR, 0.45; 95% CI, 0.32–0.68; P < .0001). However, the large differences in biochemical relapse-free survival and local recurrence did not translate into an advantage in either distant metastasis (11.0% vs. 11.3%; HR, 0.99; 95% CI, 0.67–1.44; P = .94) or in OS (76.9% with immediate radiation vs. 80.7% with observation; HR, 1.18; 95% CI, 0.91–1.53; P = .2).  Nor was there a difference in prostate– cancer-specific mortality (3.9% vs. 5.2%; HR, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.46–1.33; P = .34)	The 10-year cumulative risk of severe (grade 3) late toxicity in the immediate radiation study group was 5.3% versus 2.5% in the observation group (P = .052).  Late adverse effects of any grade were also higher in the immediate radiation group (70.8% vs. 59.7%; P = .001). The primary end point, metastasis-free survival, could be affected by serial PSA monitoring and resulting metastatic work-up for PSA increase. This could have biased the primary end point in favor of radiation therapy, which was associated with a lower rate of PSA rise. Nevertheless, metastasis-free survival was not statistically different between the two study arms (P = .06). After a median follow-up of about 10.6 years, the overall median survival was 14.7 years in the radiation therapy group versus 13.8 years in the observation group (P = .16). Although the OS rates were not statistically different, complication rates were substantially higher in the radiation therapy group: overall complications were 23.8% versus 11.9%, rectal complications were 3.3% versus 0%, and urethral stricture was 17.8% versus 9.5%. After a median follow-up of about 12.5 years, however, OS was better in the radiation therapy arm; hazard ratio (HR)death,  0.72 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.55–0.96; P = .023). The 10-year estimated survival rates were 74% in the radiation therapy arm   and 66% in the control arm. The 10-year estimated metastasis-free survivals were 73% and 65% (P = .016).[16][Level of evidence A1] With a median follow-up of 10.6 years (up to 16.6 years), the biochemical progression-free survival (PFS) rates were higher in the observation study arm (60.6% vs. 41.1%; HR, 0.49; 95% CI, 0.41–0.59; P < .0001).  Locoregional relapse rates were 8.4% versus 17.3% in favor of immediate radiation (HR, 0.45; 95% CI, 0.32–0.68; P < .0001). However, the large differences in biochemical relapse-free survival and local recurrence did not translate into an advantage in either distant metastasis (11.0% vs. 11.3%; HR, 0.99; 95% CI, 0.67–1.44; P = .94) or in OS (76.9% with immediate radiation vs. 80.7% with observation; HR, 1.18; 95% CI, 0.91–1.53; P = .2).  Nor was there a difference in prostate– cancer-specific mortality (3.9% vs. 5.2%; HR, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.46–1.33; P = .34) The 10-year cumulative risk of severe (grade 3) late toxicity in the immediate radiation study group was 5.3% versus 2.5% in the observation group (P = .052).  Late adverse effects of any grade were also higher in the immediate radiation group (70.8% vs. 59.7%; P = .001). Radical prostatectomy has been compared with watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring. For more information, see  the Radical prostatectomy compared with other treatment options section. Evidence (radical prostatectomy compared with watchful waiting): The Prostate Intervention Versus Observation Trial (PIVOT-1 or  VA-CSP-407
[NCT00007644]) is a randomized trial conducted in the PSA screening era that directly compared radical prostatectomy with watchful waiting. From November 1994 through January 2002, 731 men aged 75 years or younger with localized prostate cancer (stage T1–2, NX, M0, with a blood PSA <50 ng/mL) and a life expectancy of at least 10 years were randomly assigned to radical prostatectomy versus watchful waiting.[18-20][Level of evidence A1] About 50% of the men had nonpalpable, screen-detected disease.After a median follow-up of 12.7 years (range up to about 19.5 years), the all-cause mortality was 61.3% versus 66.8% in the prostatectomy and watchful-waiting study arms, respectively, an absolute  difference of 5.5 percentage points (95% CI -1.5 to 12.4)  that was not statistically significant (HR, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.70–1.01). Prostate–cancer-specific mortality was 7.4% versus 11.4%, and it also was not statistically significant (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.3–1.02).	Although treatment for disease progression was given more frequently in the observation arm of the study, most of the treatment was for asymptomatic, local, or biochemical (PSA) progression.	As expected, urinary incontinence and erectile/sexual dysfunction was more common in the prostatectomy group for at least 10 years of follow-up.  Absolute differences in patient-reported use of absorbent urinary pads was greater in the surgery group by more than 30 percentage points at all time points for at least 10 years.  Disease- or treatment-related limitations in activities of daily living were worse with surgery than with observation through 2 years, but then were similar in both study arms. About 50% of the men had nonpalpable, screen-detected disease. After a median follow-up of 12.7 years (range up to about 19.5 years), the all-cause mortality was 61.3% versus 66.8% in the prostatectomy and watchful-waiting study arms, respectively, an absolute  difference of 5.5 percentage points (95% CI -1.5 to 12.4)  that was not statistically significant (HR, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.70–1.01). Prostate–cancer-specific mortality was 7.4% versus 11.4%, and it also was not statistically significant (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.3–1.02). Although treatment for disease progression was given more frequently in the observation arm of the study, most of the treatment was for asymptomatic, local, or biochemical (PSA) progression. As expected, urinary incontinence and erectile/sexual dysfunction was more common in the prostatectomy group for at least 10 years of follow-up.  Absolute differences in patient-reported use of absorbent urinary pads was greater in the surgery group by more than 30 percentage points at all time points for at least 10 years.  Disease- or treatment-related limitations in activities of daily living were worse with surgery than with observation through 2 years, but then were similar in both study arms. EBRT is another treatment option used with  curative intent.[21-25]  Definitive radiation therapy should
be delayed 4 to 6 weeks after TURP to reduce the incidence of
stricture.[26]  Adjuvant hormonal therapy should be considered for patients with bulky T2b to T2c tumors.[27,28] Evidence (EBRT with or without adjuvant hormonal therapy): In the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) trial  RTOG-7706, prophylactic radiation therapy to clinically or pathologically uninvolved pelvic lymph nodes did not appear to improve OS or prostate cancer-specific survival.[29][Level of evidence A1] The phase III randomized RTOG-9413 trial (NCT00769548) included 1,323  men with localized prostate cancer, an elevated PSA, and an estimated risk of lymph node involvement of 15%. Patients were randomly assigned to one of four treatment arms: whole-pelvic radiation therapy plus neoadjuvant and concurrent hormonal therapy; prostate-only radiation therapy plus neoadjuvant and concurrent hormonal therapy; whole-pelvic radiation therapy plus adjuvant hormonal therapy; or pelvic-only radiation therapy plus adjuvant hormonal therapy.[30]; [31][Level of evidence B1]Although RTOG-9413 showed increased PFS at 4 years for patients who had a 15% estimated risk of lymph node involvement and received whole-pelvic radiation therapy compared with prostate-only radiation therapy, OS and PSA failure rates were not significantly different. In a randomized trial, 875 men with locally advanced nonmetastatic prostate cancer (T1b–T2 moderately or poorly differentiated tumors; T3 tumors of any grade) were randomly assigned to receive 3 months of a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone agonist plus long-term flutamide (250 mg PO tid) with or without EBRT.[28][Level of evidence A1]	Nineteen percent of the men had tumor stage T2, and 78% of the men had T3. At 10 years, both overall mortality (29.6% vs. 39.4%; 95% CI for the difference, 0.8%–18.8%) and the prostate–cancer-specific mortality (11.9% vs. 23.9%; 95% CI for the difference, 4.9%–19.1%) favored combined hormonal and radiation therapy.Although	 flutamide might not be considered a standard hormonal monotherapy in the setting of T2 or T3 tumors, radiation therapy provided a disease-free survival or tumor-specific survival advantage even though this monotherapy was applied. This analysis rests on the assumption that flutamide does not shorten life expectancy and cancer-specific survival. Radiation therapy was not delivered by current standards of dose and technique. Although RTOG-9413 showed increased PFS at 4 years for patients who had a 15% estimated risk of lymph node involvement and received whole-pelvic radiation therapy compared with prostate-only radiation therapy, OS and PSA failure rates were not significantly different. Nineteen percent of the men had tumor stage T2, and 78% of the men had T3. At 10 years, both overall mortality (29.6% vs. 39.4%; 95% CI for the difference, 0.8%–18.8%) and the prostate–cancer-specific mortality (11.9% vs. 23.9%; 95% CI for the difference, 4.9%–19.1%) favored combined hormonal and radiation therapy. Although	 flutamide might not be considered a standard hormonal monotherapy in the setting of T2 or T3 tumors, radiation therapy provided a disease-free survival or tumor-specific survival advantage even though this monotherapy was applied. This analysis rests on the assumption that flutamide does not shorten life expectancy and cancer-specific survival. Radiation therapy was not delivered by current standards of dose and technique. Interstitial implantation of radioisotopes (i.e., iodine I 125 [125I], palladium, and iridium Ir 192) done through a transperineal technique with either ultrasound or computed-tomography guidance, is
being used in  patients with T1 or T2a tumors.  Short-term
results in these patients are similar to those for radical prostatectomy or
EBRT.[32,33]; [34][Level of evidence C3] Factors for  consideration in the use of interstitial implants include the following: The implant is performed as outpatient surgery. The rate of
maintenance of sexual potency with interstitial implants has been reported to
be 86% to 92%.[32,34] In contrast, rates of maintenance of sexual potency with radical prostatectomy were 10% to 40% and 40% to 60% with EBRT. Typical side effects from interstitial implants that subside with time include urinary tract frequency, urgency, and less commonly, urinary retention. Rectal ulceration may also be seen.  In one series, a 10% 2-year actuarial genitourinary grade 2 complication rate and a 12% risk of rectal ulceration were seen. This risk decreased with increased operator experience and modification of the implant technique.[32] Long-term
follow-up of these patients is necessary to assess treatment efficacy and side
effects. Retropubic freehand implantation with 125I has been associated with an
increased local failure and complication rate [35,36] and  is now rarely done. Vascular-targeted photodynamic therapy using a photosensitizing agent has been tested in men with low-risk prostate cancer.  In the  CLIN1001 PCM301 (NCT01310894) randomized trial, 413 men with low-risk cancer (tumor stage T1–T2c, PSA ≤10 ng/mL, generally Gleason score 3 + 3) were randomly assigned in an open-label trial to receive either the photosensitizing agent, padeliporfin (4 mg/kg intravenously [IV] over 10 minutes, and optical fibers inserted into the target area of the prostate, then activated by 753 nm laser light at 150 mW/cm for 22 minutes 15 seconds), or active surveillance.[37] Median time to local disease progression was 28.3 months for patients who received padeliporfin and 14.1 months for patients who were assigned to active surveillance (HR, 0.34; 95% CI, 0.24–0.46; P < .0001).[37][Level of evidence B1] However, the appropriate population for photodynamic therapy may be quite narrow, as it may overtreat men with very low-risk disease and undertreat men with higher-risk disease.[38] Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Prostate. In: Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al., eds.: AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 8th ed. Springer; 2017, pp. 715–26. Consensus conference. The management of clinically localized prostate cancer. JAMA 258 (19): 2727-30, 1987. [PUBMED Abstract] Epstein JI, Paull G, Eggleston JC, et al.: Prognosis of untreated stage A1 prostatic carcinoma: a study of 94 cases with extended followup. J Urol 136 (4): 837-9, 1986. [PUBMED Abstract] Thüroff S, Chaussy C, Vallancien G, et al.: High-intensity focused ultrasound and localized prostate cancer: efficacy results from the European multicentric study. J Endourol 17 (8): 673-7, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Blana A, Murat FJ, Walter B, et al.: First analysis of the long-term results with transrectal HIFU in patients with localised prostate cancer. Eur Urol 53 (6): 1194-201, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Ficarra V, Novara G: Editorial comment on: first analysis of the long-term results with transrectal HIFU in patients with localized prostate cancer. Eur Urol 53 (6): 1201-2, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Eastham JA: Editorial comment on: first analysis of the long-term results with transrectal HIFU in patients with localized prostate cancer. Eur Urol 53 (6): 1202-3, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Chodak GW, Thisted RA, Gerber GS, et al.: Results of conservative management of clinically localized prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 330 (4): 242-8, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Whitmore WF: Expectant management of clinically localized prostatic cancer. Semin Oncol 21 (5): 560-8, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Shappley WV, Kenfield SA, Kasperzyk JL, et al.: Prospective study of determinants and outcomes of deferred treatment or watchful waiting among men with prostate cancer in a nationwide cohort. J Clin Oncol 27 (30): 4980-5, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Zincke H, Bergstralh EJ, Blute ML, et al.: Radical prostatectomy for clinically localized prostate cancer: long-term results of 1,143 patients from a single institution. J Clin Oncol 12 (11): 2254-63, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Catalona WJ, Bigg SW: Nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy: evaluation of results after 250 patients. J Urol 143 (3): 538-43; discussion 544, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Catalona WJ, Basler JW: Return of erections and urinary continence following nerve sparing radical retropubic prostatectomy. J Urol 150 (3): 905-7, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Paulson DF, Moul JW, Walther PJ: Radical prostatectomy for clinical stage T1-2N0M0 prostatic adenocarcinoma: long-term results. J Urol 144 (5): 1180-4, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Thompson IM, Tangen CM, Paradelo J, et al.: Adjuvant radiotherapy for pathologically advanced prostate cancer: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 296 (19): 2329-35, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Thompson IM, Tangen CM, Paradelo J, et al.: Adjuvant radiotherapy for pathological T3N0M0 prostate cancer significantly reduces risk of metastases and improves survival: long-term followup of a randomized clinical trial. J Urol 181 (3): 956-62, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Bolla M, van Poppel H, Collette L, et al.: Postoperative radiotherapy after radical prostatectomy: a randomised controlled trial (EORTC trial 22911). Lancet 366 (9485): 572-8, 2005 Aug 13-19. [PUBMED Abstract] Wilt TJ, Brawer MK, Jones KM, et al.: Radical prostatectomy versus observation for localized prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 367 (3): 203-13, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Wilt TJ: The Prostate Cancer Intervention Versus Observation Trial: VA/NCI/AHRQ Cooperative Studies Program #407 (PIVOT): design and baseline results of a randomized controlled trial comparing radical prostatectomy with watchful waiting for men with clinically localized prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 2012 (45): 184-90, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Wilt TJ, Jones KM, Barry MJ, et al.: Follow-up of Prostatectomy versus Observation for Early Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 377 (2): 132-142, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Bagshaw MA: External radiation therapy of carcinoma of the prostate. Cancer 45 (7 Suppl): 1912-21, 1980. [PUBMED Abstract] Forman JD, Zinreich E, Lee DJ, et al.: Improving the therapeutic ratio of external beam irradiation for carcinoma of the prostate. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 11 (12): 2073-80, 1985. [PUBMED Abstract] Ploysongsang S, Aron BS, Shehata WM, et al.: Comparison of whole pelvis versus small-field radiation therapy for carcinoma of prostate. Urology 27 (1): 10-6, 1986. [PUBMED Abstract] Pilepich MV, Bagshaw MA, Asbell SO, et al.: Definitive radiotherapy in resectable (stage A2 and B) carcinoma of the prostate--results of a nationwide overview. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 13 (5): 659-63, 1987. [PUBMED Abstract] Amdur RJ, Parsons JT, Fitzgerald LT, et al.: The effect of overall treatment time on local control in patients with adenocarcinoma of the prostate treated with radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 19 (6): 1377-82, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Seymore CH, el-Mahdi AM, Schellhammer PF: The effect of prior transurethral resection of the prostate on post radiation urethral strictures and bladder neck contractures. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 12 (9): 1597-600, 1986. [PUBMED Abstract] Seidenfeld J, Samson DJ, Aronson N, et al.: Relative effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of methods of androgen suppression in the treatment of advanced prostate cancer. Evid Rep Technol Assess (Summ)  (4): i-x, 1-246, I1-36, passim, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Widmark A, Klepp O, Solberg A, et al.: Endocrine treatment, with or without radiotherapy, in locally advanced prostate cancer (SPCG-7/SFUO-3): an open randomised phase III trial. Lancet 373 (9660): 301-8, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Asbell SO, Martz KL, Shin KH, et al.: Impact of surgical staging in evaluating the radiotherapeutic outcome in RTOG #77-06, a phase III study for T1BN0M0 (A2) and T2N0M0 (B) prostate carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 40 (4): 769-82, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Roach M, DeSilvio M, Lawton C, et al.: Phase III trial comparing whole-pelvic versus prostate-only radiotherapy and neoadjuvant versus adjuvant combined androgen suppression: Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 9413. J Clin Oncol 21 (10): 1904-11, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Pollack A: A call for more with a desire for less: pelvic radiotherapy with androgen deprivation in the treatment of prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 21 (10): 1899-901, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Wallner K, Roy J, Harrison L: Tumor control and morbidity following transperineal iodine 125 implantation for stage T1/T2 prostatic carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 14 (2): 449-53, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] D'Amico AV, Coleman CN: Role of interstitial radiotherapy in the management of clinically organ-confined prostate cancer: the jury is still out. J Clin Oncol 14 (1): 304-15, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Ragde H, Blasko JC, Grimm PD, et al.: Interstitial iodine-125 radiation without adjuvant therapy in the treatment of clinically localized prostate carcinoma. Cancer 80 (3): 442-53, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Kuban DA, el-Mahdi AM, Schellhammer PF: I-125 interstitial implantation for prostate cancer. What have we learned 10 years later? Cancer 63 (12): 2415-20, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Fuks Z, Leibel SA, Wallner KE, et al.: The effect of local control on metastatic dissemination in carcinoma of the prostate: long-term results in patients treated with 125I implantation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 21 (3): 537-47, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Azzouzi AR, Vincendeau S, Barret E, et al.: Padeliporfin vascular-targeted photodynamic therapy versus active surveillance in men with low-risk prostate cancer (CLIN1001 PCM301): an open-label, phase 3, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol 18 (2): 181-191, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Freedland SJ: Low-risk prostate cancer: to treat or not to treat. Lancet Oncol 18 (2): 156-157, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] OverviewProstate-specific antigen (PSA) changes as markers of tumor progressionBisphosphonates and risk of bone metastases Treatment Options for Stage II Prostate Cancer Watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoringRadical prostatectomy External-beam radiation therapy (EBRT) with or without hormonal therapyInterstitial implantation of radioisotopesUltrasound-guided percutaneous cryosurgeryHigh-intensity focused ultrasoundProton-beam radiation therapyPhotodynamic therapy Current Clinical Trials Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) changes as markers of tumor progression Bisphosphonates and risk of bone metastases Watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring Radical prostatectomy External-beam radiation therapy (EBRT) with or without hormonal therapy Interstitial implantation of radioisotopes Ultrasound-guided percutaneous cryosurgery High-intensity focused ultrasound Proton-beam radiation therapy Photodynamic therapy Stage II prostate cancer is defined by the American Joint Committee on Cancer's TNM  (tumor, node, metastasis) classification system:[1] Stage IIA cT1a–c, N0, M0, prostate-specific antigen (PSA) ≥10 <20 ng/mL, Gleason ≤6. cT2a, N0, M0, PSA ≥10 <20 ng/mL, Gleason ≤6. pT2, N0, M0, PSA ≥10 <20 ng/mL, Gleason ≤6. cT2b–c, N0, M0, PSA <20 ng/mL, Gleason ≤6. Stage IIB T1–2, N0, M0, PSA <20 ng/mL, Gleason 7. Stage IIC T1–2, N0, M0, PSA <20, Gleason 7 or 8. Radical prostatectomy, external-beam radiation therapy (EBRT), and interstitial implantation of radioisotopes are each employed in the treatment of stage II prostate cancer with apparently similar therapeutic effects. Radical prostatectomy and radiation therapy yield apparently similar survival rates with as many as 10 years of follow-up. For well-selected patients, radical prostatectomy is associated with a 15-year survival comparable with an age-matched population without prostate cancer.[2] Unfortunately, randomized comparative trials of these treatment methods with prolonged follow-up are lacking. Patients with a small, palpable cancer (T2a, N0, and M0) fare better than patients in whom the disease involves both sides of the gland (T2c, N0, and M0). Patients proven free of node metastases by pelvic lymphadenectomy fare better than patients in whom this staging procedure is not performed; however, this is the result of selection of patients who have a more favorable prognosis. Side effects of the various forms of therapy—including impotence, incontinence, and bowel injury—should be considered in determining the type of treatment to employ. Often, changes in PSA are thought to be markers of tumor progression. Even though a tumor marker or characteristic may be consistently associated with a high risk of prostate cancer progression or death, it may be a very poor predictor of very limited utility in making therapeutic decisions. Baseline PSA and rate of PSA change were associated with subsequent metastasis or prostate cancer death in a cohort of 267 men with clinically localized prostate cancer who were managed by watchful waiting or active surveillance in the control arm of a randomized trial comparing radical prostatectomy with watchful waiting.[3,4] Nevertheless, the accuracy of classifying men into groups whose cancer remained indolent versus those whose cancer progressed was poor at all examined cut points of PSA or PSA rate of change. Patients with locally advanced nonmetastatic disease (T2–T4, N0–N1, and M0) are at risk of developing bone metastases. Bisphosphonates are being studied as a strategy to decrease this risk. Evidence (bisphosphonates and risk of bone metastases): A placebo-controlled randomized trial (MRC-PR04) evaluated a 5-year regimen of the first-generation bisphosphonate clodronate in high oral doses (2,080 mg qd). Clodronate therapy  had no favorable impact on either time to symptomatic bone metastasis or survival.[5][Level of evidence A1] Treatment options for patients with stage II prostate cancer    include the following: Watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring. Radical prostatectomy. External-beam radiation therapy (EBRT) with or without hormonal therapy. Interstitial implantation of radioisotopes. Ultrasound-guided percutaneous cryosurgery (under clinical evaluation). High-intensity focused ultrasound (under clinical evaluation). Proton-beam radiation therapy (under clinical evaluation). Photodynamic therapy (under clinical evaluation). Patients with stage II prostate cancer are candidates for clinical trials, including trials of neoadjuvant hormonal therapy followed by radical prostatectomy. Asymptomatic patients of advanced age or with concomitant illness may warrant consideration of careful observation without immediate active treatment.[6-8] Watch and wait, observation, expectant management, and active surveillance/active monitoring are terms indicating a strategy that does not employ immediate therapy with curative intent. For more information, see the Treatment Option Overview for Prostate Cancer section. Evidence (observation with delayed hormonal therapy): In a retrospective pooled analysis, 828 men with clinically localized prostate cancer were managed by initial conservative therapy with subsequent hormonal therapy given at the time of symptomatic disease progression.[6]Patients with well-differentiated tumors or moderately well-differentiated tumors experienced a disease-specific survival of 87% at 10 years. Overall survival (OS) closely approximated the expected survival among men of similar ages in the general population.The decision to treat should be made in the context of the patient’s age, associated medical illnesses, and personal desires. Patients with well-differentiated tumors or moderately well-differentiated tumors experienced a disease-specific survival of 87% at 10 years. Overall survival (OS) closely approximated the expected survival among men of similar ages in the general population. The decision to treat should be made in the context of the patient’s age, associated medical illnesses, and personal desires. Radical prostatectomy, usually with pelvic lymphadenectomy (with or without the nerve-sparing technique designed to preserve potency) is the most commonly applied therapy with curative intent.[2,9,10] Radical prostatectomy may be difficult after a transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP). Because about 40% to 50% of men with clinically organ-confined disease are found to have pathological extension beyond the prostate capsule or surgical margins, the role of postprostatectomy adjuvant radiation therapy has been studied. Consideration may also be given to postoperative radiation therapy (PORT) for patients who are found to have seminal vesicle invasion by tumor at the time of prostatectomy or who have a detectable level of PSA more than 3 weeks after surgery.[11-13] Because the duration of follow-up in available studies is relatively short, the value of PORT has not been determined; however, PORT does reduce local recurrence.[11] Careful treatment planning is necessary to avoid morbidity. Evidence (radical prostatectomy followed by radiation therapy): In a randomized trial of 425 men with pathological T3, N0, M0 disease, postsurgical EBRT (60–64 Gy to the prostatic fossa over 30–32 fractions) was compared with observation.[12][Level of evidence A1]The primary end point, metastasis-free survival, could be affected by serial PSA monitoring and resulting metastatic work-up for PSA increase. This could have biased the primary end point in favor of radiation therapy, which was associated with a lower rate of PSA rise. Nevertheless, metastasis-free survival was not statistically different between the two study arms (P = .06). After a median follow-up of about 10.6 years, overall  median survival was 14.7 years in the radiation therapy group versus 13.8 years in the observation group (P = .16).Although the OS rates were not statistically different, complication rates were substantially higher in the radiation therapy group compared with the observation group: overall complications were 23.8% versus 11.9%, rectal complications were 3.3% versus 0%, and urethral stricture was 17.8% versus 9.5%, respectively. After a median follow-up of about 12.5 years, however, OS was better in the radiation therapy arm; hazard ratio (HR)death, 0.72 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.55–0.96; P = .023). The 10-year estimated survival rates were 74% in the radiation therapy arm and 66% in the control arm. The 10-year estimated metastasis-free survivals were 73% and 65% (P = .016).[13][Level of evidence A1] The primary end point, metastasis-free survival, could be affected by serial PSA monitoring and resulting metastatic work-up for PSA increase. This could have biased the primary end point in favor of radiation therapy, which was associated with a lower rate of PSA rise. Nevertheless, metastasis-free survival was not statistically different between the two study arms (P = .06). After a median follow-up of about 10.6 years, overall  median survival was 14.7 years in the radiation therapy group versus 13.8 years in the observation group (P = .16). Although the OS rates were not statistically different, complication rates were substantially higher in the radiation therapy group compared with the observation group: overall complications were 23.8% versus 11.9%, rectal complications were 3.3% versus 0%, and urethral stricture was 17.8% versus 9.5%, respectively. After a median follow-up of about 12.5 years, however, OS was better in the radiation therapy arm; hazard ratio (HR)death, 0.72 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.55–0.96; P = .023). The 10-year estimated survival rates were 74% in the radiation therapy arm and 66% in the control arm. The 10-year estimated metastasis-free survivals were 73% and 65% (P = .016).[13][Level of evidence A1] Evidence (radical prostatectomy compared directly with watchful waiting/active surveillance/active monitoring and/or external-beam radiation therapy): In a randomized clinical trial performed in Sweden in the pre-PSA screening era, 695 men with prostate cancer were randomly assigned to radical prostatectomy versus watchful waiting.  Only about 5% of the men in the trial had been diagnosed by PSA screening. Therefore, the men had more extensive local disease than is typically the case in men diagnosed with prostate cancer in the United States.[14-16]	The cumulative overall mortality at 18 years was 56.1% in the radical prostatectomy arm and 68.9% in the watchful waiting study arm (absolute difference, 12.7%; 95% CI, 5.1–20.3 percentage points; relative risk [RR]death, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.59–0.86.[16][Level of evidence A1]	The cumulative incidence of prostate cancer deaths at 18 years was 17.7% versus 28.7% (absolute difference, 11.0%; 95% CI, 4.5–17.5 percentage points; RRdeath from prostate cancer, 0.56; 95% CI, 0.41–0.77).[16]	In a post-hoc–subset analysis, the improvement in overall and prostate cancer-specific mortality associated with radical prostatectomy was restricted to men younger than 65 years. The Prostate Intervention Versus Observation Trial (PIVOT-1 or VA-CSP-407) is a randomized trial conducted in the PSA screening era that directly compared radical prostatectomy with watchful waiting. From November 1994 through January 2002, 731 men aged 75 years or younger with localized prostate cancer (stage T1–2, NX, M0, with a blood PSA <50 ng/mL) and a life expectancy of at least 10 years were randomly assigned to radical prostatectomy versus watchful waiting.[17-19][Level of evidence A1] About 50% of the men had palpable tumors.After a median follow-up of 12.7 years (range up to about 19.5 years), the all-cause mortality was 61.3% versus 66.8% in the radical-prostatectomy and watchful-waiting study arms, respectively, an absolute difference of 5.5 percentage points (95% CI -1.5 to 12.4)  that was not statistically significant (HR, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.70–1.01). Prostate cancer–specific mortality was 7.4% versus 11.4%, and it also was not statistically significant (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.3–1.02). 

	Although treatment for disease progression was given more frequently in the observation arm of the study, most such treatment was for asymptomatic, local, or biochemical (PSA) progression.	As expected, urinary incontinence and erectile/sexual dysfunction was more common in the prostatectomy group for at least 10 years of follow-up.  Absolute differences in patient-reported use of absorbent urinary pads was greater in the surgery group by more than 30 percentage points at all time points for at least 10 years.  Disease- or treatment-related limitations in activities of daily living were worse with surgery than with observation through 2 years, but then were similar in both study arms. In the ProtecT trial (NCT02044172 and ISRCTN20141297), 82,429 men were screened with PSA testing, and 2,664 were diagnosed with clinically localized prostate cancer. Among those diagnosed,  1,643 men (median age 62 years, range 50–69 years) consented to a randomly assigned comparison of active monitoring, radical prostatectomy (nerve-sparing when possible), or external-beam 3D conformal radiation (74 Gy in 37 fractions).  The primary end point was prostate cancer-specific mortality.[20]With a median follow-up of 10 years, there were a total of 17 deaths from prostate cancer, with no statistically significant differences among the three study arms (P = .48).  The 10-year prostate cancer–specific survival rates were 98.8% in the active monitoring arm, 99.0% in the radical prostatectomy arm, and 99.6% radiation therapy arms.[20][Level of evidence A1]Likewise, all-cause mortality was nearly identical in all three study arms: 10.9 deaths in the active monitoring arm, 10.1 in the radical prostatectomy arm, and 10.3 in the radiation therapy arm per 1,000 person-years (P = .87).[20][Level of evidence A1]There were statistically significant differences in progression to metastatic disease among the treatment arms (33 of 545 men in the active monitoring arm; 13 of 553 men in the radical prostatectomy arm; 16 of 545 men in the radiation therapy arm) that began to emerge after 4 years, but these differences had not translated into any difference in mortality after 10-years of follow-up. Over the course of 10 years, 52% of the patients required active intervention.As expected, there were substantial differences in patient-reported outcomes among the three management approaches.[21][Level of evidence A3]  A substudy of patient-reported outcomes up to 6 years after randomization included the following:     Men in the radical prostatectomy study arm had substantial rates of urinary incontinence (e.g., using one or more absorbent pads qd was reported by 46% at 6 months   and by 17% at year 6) with very little incontinence in the other two study arms.Sexual function was also worse in the radical prostatectomy group (e.g., at 6 months, 12% of men reported erections firm enough for intercourse vs. 22% in the radiation therapy arm and 52% in the active-monitoring arm).  Bowel function, however, was worse in the radiation therapy arm (e.g., about 5% reported bloody stools at least half the time at 2 years and beyond versus none in the radical prostatectomy and active-monitoring study arms). The cumulative overall mortality at 18 years was 56.1% in the radical prostatectomy arm and 68.9% in the watchful waiting study arm (absolute difference, 12.7%; 95% CI, 5.1–20.3 percentage points; relative risk [RR]death, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.59–0.86.[16][Level of evidence A1] The cumulative incidence of prostate cancer deaths at 18 years was 17.7% versus 28.7% (absolute difference, 11.0%; 95% CI, 4.5–17.5 percentage points; RRdeath from prostate cancer, 0.56; 95% CI, 0.41–0.77).[16] In a post-hoc–subset analysis, the improvement in overall and prostate cancer-specific mortality associated with radical prostatectomy was restricted to men younger than 65 years. About 50% of the men had palpable tumors. After a median follow-up of 12.7 years (range up to about 19.5 years), the all-cause mortality was 61.3% versus 66.8% in the radical-prostatectomy and watchful-waiting study arms, respectively, an absolute difference of 5.5 percentage points (95% CI -1.5 to 12.4)  that was not statistically significant (HR, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.70–1.01). Prostate cancer–specific mortality was 7.4% versus 11.4%, and it also was not statistically significant (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.3–1.02). Although treatment for disease progression was given more frequently in the observation arm of the study, most such treatment was for asymptomatic, local, or biochemical (PSA) progression. As expected, urinary incontinence and erectile/sexual dysfunction was more common in the prostatectomy group for at least 10 years of follow-up.  Absolute differences in patient-reported use of absorbent urinary pads was greater in the surgery group by more than 30 percentage points at all time points for at least 10 years.  Disease- or treatment-related limitations in activities of daily living were worse with surgery than with observation through 2 years, but then were similar in both study arms. With a median follow-up of 10 years, there were a total of 17 deaths from prostate cancer, with no statistically significant differences among the three study arms (P = .48).  The 10-year prostate cancer–specific survival rates were 98.8% in the active monitoring arm, 99.0% in the radical prostatectomy arm, and 99.6% radiation therapy arms.[20][Level of evidence A1] Likewise, all-cause mortality was nearly identical in all three study arms: 10.9 deaths in the active monitoring arm, 10.1 in the radical prostatectomy arm, and 10.3 in the radiation therapy arm per 1,000 person-years (P = .87).[20][Level of evidence A1] There were statistically significant differences in progression to metastatic disease among the treatment arms (33 of 545 men in the active monitoring arm; 13 of 553 men in the radical prostatectomy arm; 16 of 545 men in the radiation therapy arm) that began to emerge after 4 years, but these differences had not translated into any difference in mortality after 10-years of follow-up. Over the course of 10 years, 52% of the patients required active intervention. As expected, there were substantial differences in patient-reported outcomes among the three management approaches.[21][Level of evidence A3]  A substudy of patient-reported outcomes up to 6 years after randomization included the following:     Men in the radical prostatectomy study arm had substantial rates of urinary incontinence (e.g., using one or more absorbent pads qd was reported by 46% at 6 months   and by 17% at year 6) with very little incontinence in the other two study arms.Sexual function was also worse in the radical prostatectomy group (e.g., at 6 months, 12% of men reported erections firm enough for intercourse vs. 22% in the radiation therapy arm and 52% in the active-monitoring arm).  Bowel function, however, was worse in the radiation therapy arm (e.g., about 5% reported bloody stools at least half the time at 2 years and beyond versus none in the radical prostatectomy and active-monitoring study arms). Men in the radical prostatectomy study arm had substantial rates of urinary incontinence (e.g., using one or more absorbent pads qd was reported by 46% at 6 months   and by 17% at year 6) with very little incontinence in the other two study arms. Sexual function was also worse in the radical prostatectomy group (e.g., at 6 months, 12% of men reported erections firm enough for intercourse vs. 22% in the radiation therapy arm and 52% in the active-monitoring arm). Bowel function, however, was worse in the radiation therapy arm (e.g., about 5% reported bloody stools at least half the time at 2 years and beyond versus none in the radical prostatectomy and active-monitoring study arms). EBRT is another treatment option often used with curative intent.[22-26] Definitive radiation therapy should be delayed 4 to 6 weeks after TURP to reduce the incidence of stricture.[27]      Adjuvant hormonal therapy should be considered for patients with bulky T2b to T2c tumors.[28] The role of adjuvant hormonal therapy in patients with locally advanced disease has been analyzed by the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (now the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality). Most patients had more advanced disease, but patients with bulky T2b to T2c tumors were included in the studies that were re-evaluating the role of adjuvant hormonal therapy in patients with locally advanced disease. Evidence (EBRT with or without adjuvant hormonal therapy): The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group's (RTOG) trial 7706  (RTOG-7706).[29][Level of evidence A1]	Prophylactic radiation therapy to clinically or pathologically uninvolved pelvic lymph nodes does not appear to improve OS or prostate cancer-specific survival. RTOG-9413 (RTOG-9413 [NCT00769548]) trial.[30,31][Level of evidence B1]Although RTOG-9413 showed increased progression-free survival at 4 years for patients who had a 15% estimated risk of lymph node involvement and received whole-pelvic radiation therapy compared with prostate-only radiation therapy, OS and PSA failure rates were not significantly different. In a randomized trial, 875 men with locally advanced nonmetastatic prostate cancer (T1b–T2 moderately or poorly differentiated tumors; T3 tumors of any grade) were randomly assigned to receive 3 months of a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) agonist plus long-term flutamide (250 mg PO tid) with or without EBRT.[32][Level of evidence A1]Nineteen percent of the men had tumor stage T2, and 78% of the men had tumor stage T3.  At 10 years, both overall mortality (29.6% vs. 39.4%; 95% CI for the difference, 0.8%–18.8%) and prostate  cancer-specific mortality (11.9% vs. 23.9%; 95% CI for the difference,  4.9%–19.1%) favored combined hormonal and radiation therapy.Although flutamide might not be considered a standard hormonal monotherapy in the setting of T2 or T3 tumors,  radiation therapy provided a disease-free survival or tumor-specific survival advantage even though this monotherapy was applied.  This analysis rests on the assumption that flutamide does not shorten life expectancy and cancer-specific survival.  Radiation therapy was not delivered by current standards of dose and technique. Another trial compared androgen deprivation therapy (ADT: an LH-RH agonist or orchiectomy) with ADT plus radiation therapy (65–69 Gy to the prostate by 4-field box technique, including 45 Gy to the whole pelvis, seminal vesicles, and external/internal iliac nodes unless the lymph nodes were histologically negative). This  trial, NCIC CTG PR.3/MRC UKPRO7 [NCT00002633], from the  National Cancer Institute of Canada randomly assigned 1,205 patients with high-risk (PSA >40 ng/mL or PSA >20 ng/mL and Gleason score ≥8), T2 (12%–13% of the patients), T3 (83% of the patients), and T4 (4%–5% of the patients) with clinical or pathologically staged N0, M0 disease.[33,34][Level of evidence A1]At a median follow-up of 8 years (maximum, 13 years), OS was superior in the ADT-plus-radiation therapy  group (HRdeath, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.57–0.85, P = .001). The OS rate at 10 years was 55%  for the ADT-plus-radiation therapy  group versus 49% for the ADT-alone group.Although radiation therapy had the expected bowel and urinary side effects, quality of life was the same in each study group by 24 months and beyond.[35] A meta-analysis of randomized clinical trial evidence comparing radiation therapy with radiation therapy plus  prolonged androgen suppression has been published. The meta-analysis found a difference in 5-year OS in favor of radiation therapy plus continued androgen suppression (LH-RH agonist or orchiectomy) as compared with radiation therapy alone (HR, 0.631; 95% CI, 0.479–0.831).[28][Level of evidence A1] In a randomized, prospective clinical trial, 18 months of androgen suppression with an LH-RH agonist appears to have provided results that were similar to 36 months with respect to OS and disease-specific survival.[36][Level of evidence A1]  In a multicenter trial, 630 men with stage II to stage IVA cancer (clinical stage T3–T4, or PSA >20 ng/ml, or Gleason score >7) received 70 Gy of radiation in 35 fractions plus a total of either 18 or 36 months of goserelin acetate.	With a median follow-up of 9.4 years, OS was nearly identical in each study arm (62% at 10 years; HRdeath, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.81–1.29; P  = .8), as was prostate cancer–specific survival (HRprostate death, 0.95; 95% CI, 0.58–0.55; P = .8).	Global quality of life was nearly identical on both study arms, but sexual activity and interest in sex was moderately better in the 18-month arm.[36][Level of evidence A3] A meta-analysis of seven randomized controlled trials comparing early hormonal treatment (adjuvant or neoadjuvant) to deferred hormonal treatment (LH-RH agonists and/or antiandrogens) in patients with locally advanced prostate cancer, whether treated with prostatectomy, radiation therapy, or watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring, showed improved overall mortality for patients receiving early treatment (RR, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.82–0.91).[37][Level of evidence A1] Short-term neoadjuvant−androgen therapy administered before and during radiation therapy has shown benefit in at least some patients with clinically localized prostate cancer. In an open-label, randomized trial (RTOG-9408    [NCT00002597]), 1,979 men with nonmetastatic stage T1b–c, T2a, or T2b tumors and a PSA level of 20 ng/mL or less were randomly assigned to receive radiation therapy (66.6 Gy prostate dose in 1.8 Gy daily fractions) with or without 4 months of ADT (flutamide 250 mg PO  tid plus either monthly goserelin 3.6 mg subcutaneously (SQ) or leuprolide 7.5 mg intramuscularly), beginning 2 months before radiation therapy. Median follow-up was about 9 years.[38][Level of evidence A1] The 10-year OS rate was 57% in the radiation-only group versus 62% in the combined-therapy group (HRdeath, 1.17; 95% CI, 1.01–1.35; P = .03).In a post-hoc analysis, there was no statistically significant interaction between the treatment effect and baseline-risk category of the patients. However, there appeared to be little, if any, benefit associated with combined therapy in the lowest-risk category of patients (Gleason score ≤6; PSA ≤10 ng/mL; and clinical stage ≤T2a).The OS benefit was most apparent in men with intermediate-risk tumors (Gleason score 7; or Gleason score ≤6 and PSA >10 ng/mL; or clinical stage T2b). The duration of neoadjuvant hormonal therapy has been tested in a randomized trial (TROG 96.01 [ACTRN12607000237482])  involving 818 men with locally advanced (T2b, T2c, T3, and T4) nonmetastatic cancer treated with radiation therapy (i.e., 66 Gy in 2 Gy daily fractions to the prostate and seminal vesicles but not including regional lymph nodes).[39] In an open-label design, patients were randomly assigned to receive radiation therapy alone, 3 months of neoadjuvant androgen deprivation therapy (NADT) (goserelin 3.6 mg SQ each month plus flutamide 250 mg PO  tid) for 2 months before and during radiation, or 6 months of NADT for 5 months before and during radiation.[39][Level of evidence A1]After a median follow-up of 10.6 years, there were no statistically significant differences between the radiation-alone group and the radiation-plus-3-months-of NADT group. However, the 6-month NADT arm showed better prostate–cancer-specific mortality and overall mortality than the radiation-alone group; 10-year all-cause mortality 29.2% versus 42.5% (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.48–0.83, P = .0008). The duration of neoadjuvant hormonal therapy was tested in another trial (RTOG-9910 [NCT00005044]) of 1,489 eligible men with intermediate-risk prostate cancer (T1b–4, Gleason score 2–6, and PSA >10 but ≤100 ng/mL; T1b–4, Gleason score 7, and PSA <20; or T1b–1c, Gleason score 8–10, and PSA <20) and no evidence of metastases.  The men were randomly assigned to receive short-course neoadjuvant–androgen suppression (an LH-RH agonist plus bicalutamide or flutamide for 8 weeks before and 8 weeks during radiation therapy) or long-course neoadjuvant–androgen suppression (28 weeks before and 8 weeks during radiation therapy).  Both groups received 70.2 Gy radiation in 39 daily fractions to the prostate and 46.8 Gy to the iliac lymph nodes.[40][Level of evidence A1] After a median of 9.4 years, 10-year prostate-specific mortality, the primary end point, was low in both study arms: 5% versus 4% (HR, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.48–1.39).[40][Level of evidence A1]	No statistically significant differences in overall mortality or in locoregional disease progression were found.[40][Level of evidence A1]	There was also no apparent differential effect of androgen suppression duration among any of the risk-group subsets. Addition of androgen suppression therapy to EBRT may benefit men who are at an elevated risk of disease recurrence and death from prostate cancer (RTOG-9202 [NCT00767286]). Prophylactic radiation therapy to clinically or pathologically uninvolved pelvic lymph nodes does not appear to improve OS or prostate cancer-specific survival. Although RTOG-9413 showed increased progression-free survival at 4 years for patients who had a 15% estimated risk of lymph node involvement and received whole-pelvic radiation therapy compared with prostate-only radiation therapy, OS and PSA failure rates were not significantly different. Nineteen percent of the men had tumor stage T2, and 78% of the men had tumor stage T3.  At 10 years, both overall mortality (29.6% vs. 39.4%; 95% CI for the difference, 0.8%–18.8%) and prostate  cancer-specific mortality (11.9% vs. 23.9%; 95% CI for the difference,  4.9%–19.1%) favored combined hormonal and radiation therapy. Although flutamide might not be considered a standard hormonal monotherapy in the setting of T2 or T3 tumors,  radiation therapy provided a disease-free survival or tumor-specific survival advantage even though this monotherapy was applied.  This analysis rests on the assumption that flutamide does not shorten life expectancy and cancer-specific survival.  Radiation therapy was not delivered by current standards of dose and technique. At a median follow-up of 8 years (maximum, 13 years), OS was superior in the ADT-plus-radiation therapy  group (HRdeath, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.57–0.85, P = .001). The OS rate at 10 years was 55%  for the ADT-plus-radiation therapy  group versus 49% for the ADT-alone group. Although radiation therapy had the expected bowel and urinary side effects, quality of life was the same in each study group by 24 months and beyond.[35] With a median follow-up of 9.4 years, OS was nearly identical in each study arm (62% at 10 years; HRdeath, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.81–1.29; P  = .8), as was prostate cancer–specific survival (HRprostate death, 0.95; 95% CI, 0.58–0.55; P = .8). Global quality of life was nearly identical on both study arms, but sexual activity and interest in sex was moderately better in the 18-month arm.[36][Level of evidence A3] The 10-year OS rate was 57% in the radiation-only group versus 62% in the combined-therapy group (HRdeath, 1.17; 95% CI, 1.01–1.35; P = .03). In a post-hoc analysis, there was no statistically significant interaction between the treatment effect and baseline-risk category of the patients. However, there appeared to be little, if any, benefit associated with combined therapy in the lowest-risk category of patients (Gleason score ≤6; PSA ≤10 ng/mL; and clinical stage ≤T2a). The OS benefit was most apparent in men with intermediate-risk tumors (Gleason score 7; or Gleason score ≤6 and PSA >10 ng/mL; or clinical stage T2b). After a median follow-up of 10.6 years, there were no statistically significant differences between the radiation-alone group and the radiation-plus-3-months-of NADT group. However, the 6-month NADT arm showed better prostate–cancer-specific mortality and overall mortality than the radiation-alone group; 10-year all-cause mortality 29.2% versus 42.5% (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.48–0.83, P = .0008). After a median of 9.4 years, 10-year prostate-specific mortality, the primary end point, was low in both study arms: 5% versus 4% (HR, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.48–1.39).[40][Level of evidence A1] No statistically significant differences in overall mortality or in locoregional disease progression were found.[40][Level of evidence A1] There was also no apparent differential effect of androgen suppression duration among any of the risk-group subsets. Interstitial implantation of radioisotopes  (i.e., iodine I 125 [125I], palladium, and iridium), using a transperineal technique with either ultrasound or computed tomography guidance, 
is
being done in patients with T1 or T2a tumors.  Short-term
results in these patients are similar to those for radical prostatectomy or
EBRT.[41,42]; [43][Level of evidence C3] Factors for consideration in the use of interstitial implants include the following: The implant is performed as outpatient surgery. The rate of maintenance of sexual potency with interstitial implants has been reported to be 86% to 92%.[41,43] In contrast, rates of maintenance of sexual potency with radical prostatectomy were 10% to 40% and 40% to 60% with EBRT. Typical side effects from interstitial implants that are seen in most patients but subside with time include urinary tract frequency, urgency, and less commonly, urinary retention. Rectal ulceration may also be seen.[41]  In one series, a 10% 2-year actuarial genitourinary grade 2 complication rate and a 12% risk of rectal ulceration were seen. This risk decreased with increased operator experience and modification of the implant technique.[44] Long-term follow-up of these patients is necessary to assess treatment efficacy and side effects. Retropubic freehand implantation with 125I has been associated with an increased local failure and complication rate [44,45] and is now rarely done. Cryosurgery is a surgical technique that involves destruction of prostate
cancer cells by intermittent freezing of the prostate with cryoprobes followed by thawing.[46][Level of evidence C1]; [47,48][Level of evidence C3]  Cryosurgery is less well
established than standard prostatectomy, and long-term outcomes are not as well established as with prostatectomy or radiation therapy. 
Serious toxic effects include: Bladder outlet injury. Urinary incontinence. Sexual impotence. Rectal injury. The frequency of other side effects and the probability of cancer control at 5 years' follow-up  have varied among reporting centers, and series are small compared with  surgery and radiation therapy.[47,48] High-intensity focused ultrasound has been reported in case series to produce good local disease control.  However, it has not been directly compared with more standard therapies, and experience with it is more limited.[49-51] There is growing interest in the use of proton-beam radiation therapy for the treatment of prostate cancer. Although the dose distribution of this form of charged-particle radiation has the potential to improve the therapeutic ratio of prostate radiation, allowing for an increase in dose to the tumor without a substantial increase in side effects, no randomized controlled trials have been reported that compare its efficacy and toxicity with those of other forms of radiation therapy. Vascular-targeted photodynamic therapy using a photosensitizing agent has been tested in men with low-risk prostate cancer.  In the  CLIN1001 PCM301 (NCT01310894) randomized trial, 413 men with low-risk cancer (tumor stage T1–T2c, PSA ≤10 ng/mL, generally Gleason score 3 + 3) were randomly assigned in an open-label trial to receive either the photosensitizing agent, padeliporfin (4 mg/kg IV over 10 minutes, and optical fibers inserted into the target area of the prostate, then activated by 753 nm laser light at 150 mW/cm for 22 minutes 15 seconds), or active surveillance.[52] Median time to local disease progression was 28.3 months for patients who received padeliporfin and 14.1 months for patients who were assigned to active surveillance (HR, 0.34; 95% CI, 0.24–0.46; P < .0001).[52][Level of evidence B1] However, the appropriate population for photodynamic therapy may be quite  narrow, as it may overtreat men with very low-risk disease and undertreat men with higher-risk disease.[53] Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Prostate. In: Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al., eds.: AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 8th ed. Springer; 2017, pp. 715–26. Zincke H, Bergstralh EJ, Blute ML, et al.: Radical prostatectomy for clinically localized prostate cancer: long-term results of 1,143 patients from a single institution. J Clin Oncol 12 (11): 2254-63, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Fall K, Garmo H, Andrén O, et al.: Prostate-specific antigen levels as a predictor of lethal prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 99 (7): 526-32, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Parekh DJ, Ankerst DP, Thompson IM: Prostate-specific antigen levels, prostate-specific antigen kinetics, and prostate cancer prognosis: a tocsin calling for prospective studies. J Natl Cancer Inst 99 (7): 496-7, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Mason MD, Sydes MR, Glaholm J, et al.: Oral sodium clodronate for nonmetastatic prostate cancer--results of a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial: Medical Research Council PR04 (ISRCTN61384873). J Natl Cancer Inst 99 (10): 765-76, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Chodak GW, Thisted RA, Gerber GS, et al.: Results of conservative management of clinically localized prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 330 (4): 242-8, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Whitmore WF: Expectant management of clinically localized prostatic cancer. Semin Oncol 21 (5): 560-8, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Shappley WV, Kenfield SA, Kasperzyk JL, et al.: Prospective study of determinants and outcomes of deferred treatment or watchful waiting among men with prostate cancer in a nationwide cohort. J Clin Oncol 27 (30): 4980-5, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Catalona WJ, Bigg SW: Nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy: evaluation of results after 250 patients. J Urol 143 (3): 538-43; discussion 544, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Catalona WJ, Basler JW: Return of erections and urinary continence following nerve sparing radical retropubic prostatectomy. J Urol 150 (3): 905-7, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Paulson DF, Moul JW, Walther PJ: Radical prostatectomy for clinical stage T1-2N0M0 prostatic adenocarcinoma: long-term results. J Urol 144 (5): 1180-4, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Thompson IM, Tangen CM, Paradelo J, et al.: Adjuvant radiotherapy for pathologically advanced prostate cancer: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 296 (19): 2329-35, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Thompson IM, Tangen CM, Paradelo J, et al.: Adjuvant radiotherapy for pathological T3N0M0 prostate cancer significantly reduces risk of metastases and improves survival: long-term followup of a randomized clinical trial. J Urol 181 (3): 956-62, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Holmberg L, Bill-Axelson A, Helgesen F, et al.: A randomized trial comparing radical prostatectomy with watchful waiting in early prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 347 (11): 781-9, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Bill-Axelson A, Holmberg L, Ruutu M, et al.: Radical prostatectomy versus watchful waiting in early prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 352 (19): 1977-84, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Bill-Axelson A, Holmberg L, Garmo H, et al.: Radical prostatectomy or watchful waiting in early prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 370 (10): 932-42, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Wilt TJ, Brawer MK, Jones KM, et al.: Radical prostatectomy versus observation for localized prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 367 (3): 203-13, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Wilt TJ: The Prostate Cancer Intervention Versus Observation Trial: VA/NCI/AHRQ Cooperative Studies Program #407 (PIVOT): design and baseline results of a randomized controlled trial comparing radical prostatectomy with watchful waiting for men with clinically localized prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 2012 (45): 184-90, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Wilt TJ, Jones KM, Barry MJ, et al.: Follow-up of Prostatectomy versus Observation for Early Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 377 (2): 132-142, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Hamdy FC, Donovan JL, Lane JA, et al.: 10-Year Outcomes after Monitoring, Surgery, or Radiotherapy for Localized Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 375 (15): 1415-1424, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Donovan JL, Hamdy FC, Lane JA, et al.: Patient-Reported Outcomes after Monitoring, Surgery, or Radiotherapy for Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 375 (15): 1425-1437, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Bagshaw MA: External radiation therapy of carcinoma of the prostate. Cancer 45 (7 Suppl): 1912-21, 1980. [PUBMED Abstract] Forman JD, Zinreich E, Lee DJ, et al.: Improving the therapeutic ratio of external beam irradiation for carcinoma of the prostate. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 11 (12): 2073-80, 1985. [PUBMED Abstract] Ploysongsang S, Aron BS, Shehata WM, et al.: Comparison of whole pelvis versus small-field radiation therapy for carcinoma of prostate. Urology 27 (1): 10-6, 1986. [PUBMED Abstract] Pilepich MV, Bagshaw MA, Asbell SO, et al.: Definitive radiotherapy in resectable (stage A2 and B) carcinoma of the prostate--results of a nationwide overview. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 13 (5): 659-63, 1987. [PUBMED Abstract] Amdur RJ, Parsons JT, Fitzgerald LT, et al.: The effect of overall treatment time on local control in patients with adenocarcinoma of the prostate treated with radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 19 (6): 1377-82, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Seymore CH, el-Mahdi AM, Schellhammer PF: The effect of prior transurethral resection of the prostate on post radiation urethral strictures and bladder neck contractures. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 12 (9): 1597-600, 1986. [PUBMED Abstract] Seidenfeld J, Samson DJ, Aronson N, et al.: Relative effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of methods of androgen suppression in the treatment of advanced prostate cancer. Evid Rep Technol Assess (Summ)  (4): i-x, 1-246, I1-36, passim, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Asbell SO, Martz KL, Shin KH, et al.: Impact of surgical staging in evaluating the radiotherapeutic outcome in RTOG #77-06, a phase III study for T1BN0M0 (A2) and T2N0M0 (B) prostate carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 40 (4): 769-82, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Roach M, DeSilvio M, Lawton C, et al.: Phase III trial comparing whole-pelvic versus prostate-only radiotherapy and neoadjuvant versus adjuvant combined androgen suppression: Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 9413. J Clin Oncol 21 (10): 1904-11, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Pollack A: A call for more with a desire for less: pelvic radiotherapy with androgen deprivation in the treatment of prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 21 (10): 1899-901, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Widmark A, Klepp O, Solberg A, et al.: Endocrine treatment, with or without radiotherapy, in locally advanced prostate cancer (SPCG-7/SFUO-3): an open randomised phase III trial. Lancet 373 (9660): 301-8, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Warde P, Mason M, Ding K, et al.: Combined androgen deprivation therapy and radiation therapy for locally advanced prostate cancer: a randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet 378 (9809): 2104-11, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Mason MD, Parulekar WR, Sydes MR, et al.: Final Report of the Intergroup Randomized Study of Combined Androgen-Deprivation Therapy Plus Radiotherapy Versus Androgen-Deprivation Therapy Alone in Locally Advanced Prostate Cancer. J Clin Oncol 33 (19): 2143-50, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Brundage M, Sydes MR, Parulekar WR, et al.: Impact of Radiotherapy When Added to Androgen-Deprivation Therapy for Locally Advanced Prostate Cancer: Long-Term Quality-of-Life Outcomes From the NCIC CTG PR3/MRC PR07 Randomized Trial. J Clin Oncol 33 (19): 2151-7, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Nabid A, Carrier N, Martin AG, et al.: Duration of Androgen Deprivation Therapy in High-risk Prostate Cancer: A Randomized Phase III Trial. Eur Urol 74 (4): 432-441, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Boustead G, Edwards SJ: Systematic review of early vs deferred hormonal treatment of locally advanced prostate cancer: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. BJU Int 99 (6): 1383-9, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Jones CU, Hunt D, McGowan DG, et al.: Radiotherapy and short-term androgen deprivation for localized prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 365 (2): 107-18, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Denham JW, Steigler A, Lamb DS, et al.: Short-term neoadjuvant androgen deprivation and radiotherapy for locally advanced prostate cancer: 10-year data from the TROG 96.01 randomised trial. Lancet Oncol 12 (5): 451-9, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Pisansky TM, Hunt D, Gomella LG, et al.: Duration of androgen suppression before radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer: radiation therapy oncology group randomized clinical trial 9910. J Clin Oncol 33 (4): 332-9, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Wallner K, Roy J, Harrison L: Tumor control and morbidity following transperineal iodine 125 implantation for stage T1/T2 prostatic carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 14 (2): 449-53, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] D'Amico AV, Coleman CN: Role of interstitial radiotherapy in the management of clinically organ-confined prostate cancer: the jury is still out. J Clin Oncol 14 (1): 304-15, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Ragde H, Blasko JC, Grimm PD, et al.: Interstitial iodine-125 radiation without adjuvant therapy in the treatment of clinically localized prostate carcinoma. Cancer 80 (3): 442-53, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Kuban DA, el-Mahdi AM, Schellhammer PF: I-125 interstitial implantation for prostate cancer. What have we learned 10 years later? Cancer 63 (12): 2415-20, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Fuks Z, Leibel SA, Wallner KE, et al.: The effect of local control on metastatic dissemination in carcinoma of the prostate: long-term results in patients treated with 125I implantation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 21 (3): 537-47, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Robinson JW, Saliken JC, Donnelly BJ, et al.: Quality-of-life outcomes for men treated with cryosurgery for localized prostate carcinoma. Cancer 86 (9): 1793-801, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Donnelly BJ, Saliken JC, Ernst DS, et al.: Prospective trial of cryosurgical ablation of the prostate: five-year results. Urology 60 (4): 645-9, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Aus G, Pileblad E, Hugosson J: Cryosurgical ablation of the prostate: 5-year follow-up of a prospective study. Eur Urol 42 (2): 133-8, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Blana A, Murat FJ, Walter B, et al.: First analysis of the long-term results with transrectal HIFU in patients with localised prostate cancer. Eur Urol 53 (6): 1194-201, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Ficarra V, Novara G: Editorial comment on: first analysis of the long-term results with transrectal HIFU in patients with localized prostate cancer. Eur Urol 53 (6): 1201-2, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Eastham JA: Editorial comment on: first analysis of the long-term results with transrectal HIFU in patients with localized prostate cancer. Eur Urol 53 (6): 1202-3, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Azzouzi AR, Vincendeau S, Barret E, et al.: Padeliporfin vascular-targeted photodynamic therapy versus active surveillance in men with low-risk prostate cancer (CLIN1001 PCM301): an open-label, phase 3, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol 18 (2): 181-191, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Freedland SJ: Low-risk prostate cancer: to treat or not to treat. Lancet Oncol 18 (2): 156-157, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Overview Treatment Options  for Stage III Prostate CancerExternal-beam radiation therapy (EBRT) with or without hormonal therapyHormonal manipulations (with or without radiation therapy) Radical prostatectomy with or without EBRTWatchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring Treatment of Symptoms Radiation therapyHormonal manipulationInterstitial implantation combined with EBRTAlternative forms of radiation therapyUltrasound-guided percutaneous cryosurgery Current Clinical Trials External-beam radiation therapy (EBRT) with or without hormonal therapy Hormonal manipulations (with or without radiation therapy) Radical prostatectomy with or without EBRT Watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring Radiation therapy Hormonal manipulation Interstitial implantation combined with EBRT Alternative forms of radiation therapy Ultrasound-guided percutaneous cryosurgery Stage III prostate cancer is defined by the American Joint Committee on Cancer's TNM  (tumor, node, metastasis) classification  system:[1] Stage IIIA T1–2, N0, M0, prostate-specific antigen (PSA) ≥20, Gleason ≤6–8. Stage IIIB T3–4, N0, M0, any PSA, Gleason ≤6–8. Stage IIIC Any T, N0, M0, any PSA, Gleason 9 or 10. Extraprostatic extension with microscopic bladder neck invasion (T4) is included with T3a. External-beam radiation therapy (EBRT), interstitial implantation of radioisotopes, and radical prostatectomy are used to treat stage III prostate cancer.[2] Prognosis is greatly affected by whether regional lymph nodes are evaluated and proven not to be involved. EBRT using a linear accelerator is the most common treatment for patients with stage III prostate cancer, and large series support its success in achieving local disease control and disease-free survival (DFS).[3,4]  The results of radical prostatectomy in stage III patients are greatly inferior compared with results in patients with stage II cancer. Interstitial implantation of radioisotopes is technically difficult in large tumors. The patient’s symptoms related to cancer, age, and coexisting medical illnesses should be considered before deciding on a therapeutic plan. In a series of 372 patients treated with radiation therapy and followed for 20 years, 47% eventually died of prostate cancer, but 44% died of intercurrent illnesses without evidence of prostate cancer.[4] Treatment options for patients with stage III prostate cancer  include the following: External-beam radiation therapy (EBRT) with or without hormonal therapy. Hormonal manipulations (with or without radiation therapy). Radical prostatectomy with or without EBRT. Watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring. EBRT alone,[3-7] luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) agonist, or orchiectomy, in addition to EBRT, should be considered.[8-16] Definitive radiation therapy should be delayed until 4 to 6 weeks after transurethral resection to reduce the incidence of stricture.[17] Hormonal therapy should be considered in conjunction with radiation therapy especially in men who do not have underlying moderate or severe comorbidities.[8,9] Several studies have investigated its use in patients with locally advanced disease. Evidence (EBRT with or without hormonal therapy): Although patients in the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG)  RTOG-9413 trial  (NCT00769548) showed a 15% estimated risk of lymph node involvement and received whole-pelvic radiation therapy compared with prostate-only radiation therapy, overall survival (OS) and PSA failure rates were not significantly different.[18]; [19][Level of evidence B1] In a randomized trial, 875 men with locally advanced nonmetastatic prostate cancer (T1b–T2 moderately or poorly differentiated tumors; T3 tumors of any grade) were randomly assigned to receive 3 months of an LH-RH agonist plus long-term flutamide (250 mg PO tid) with or without EBRT. Nineteen percent of the men had tumor stage T2, and 78% of the men had stage T3.[20][Level of evidence A1]At 10 years, both overall mortality (29.6% vs. 39.4%; 95% confidence interval [CI] for the difference, 0.8%–8.8%) and the prostate cancer-specific mortality (11.9% vs. 23.9%; 95% CI for the difference,  4.9%–19.1%) favored combined hormonal and radiation therapy.Although flutamide might not be considered a standard hormonal monotherapy in the setting of T2 or T3 tumors,  radiation therapy provided a DFS or tumor-specific survival advantage even though this monotherapy was applied.  This analysis rests on the assumption that flutamide does not shorten life expectancy and cancer-specific survival.  Radiation therapy was not delivered by current standards of dose and technique. Another trial compared androgen deprivation therapy (ADT: an LH-RH  agonist or orchiectomy) to ADT plus radiation therapy (65–69 Gy to the prostate by 4-field box technique, including 45 Gy to the whole pelvis, seminal vesicles, and external/internal iliac nodes unless the lymph nodes were histologically negative). This  trial (NCIC CTG PR.3/MRC UKPRO7 [NCT00002633]) from the  National Cancer Institute of Canada, randomly assigned 1,205 patients with high-risk (PSA >40 ng/mL or PSA >20 ng/mL and Gleason score ≥8), T2 (12%–13% of the patients), T3 (83% of the patients), and T4 (4%–5% of the patients) with clinical or pathologically staged N0, M0 disease.[21,22][Level of evidence A1] At a median follow-up of 8 years (maximum, 13 years), OS was superior in the ADT-plus-radiation therapy  group (hazard ratio [HR]death,  0.77; 95% CI, 0.57–0.85, P = .001). The OS rate at 10 years was 55%  for the ADT-plus-radiation therapy  group versus 49% for the ADT-alone group.Although radiation therapy  had the expected bowel and urinary side effects, quality of life (QOL) was the same in each study group by 24 months and beyond.[23] The RTOG performed a prospective randomized trial (RTOG-8531) in patients with T3, N0, or any T, N1, M0 disease who received prostatic and pelvic radiation therapy and then were randomly assigned to receive immediate adjuvant goserelin or observation with administration of goserelin at time of relapse. In patients assigned to receive adjuvant goserelin, the drug was started during the last week of the radiation therapy course and was continued indefinitely or until signs of progression.[24][Level of evidence A1] The actuarial 10-year OS rate for the entire population of 945 analyzable patients was 49% on the adjuvant arm versus 39% on the observation arm (P = .002). There was also an improved actuarial 10-year local failure rate (23% vs. 38%, P < .001). A similar trial was performed by the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC). Patients with T1, T2 (World Health Organization grade 3), N0–NX or T3, T4, N0 disease were randomly assigned to receive either pelvic/prostate radiation therapy or identical radiation therapy and adjuvant goserelin (with cyproterone acetate for 1 month) starting with radiation therapy and continuing for 3 years. The 401 patients available for analysis were followed for a median of 9.1 years.[10,25][Levels of evidence A1 and B1] The Kaplan-Meier estimates of OS rates at 10 years were 58.1% in the adjuvant goserelin arm and 39.8% in the radiation alone arm (P = .0004). Similarly, 10-year DFS rates (47.7% vs. 22.7%, P < .0001) and local control rates (94.0% vs. 76.5%, P < .001) favored the adjuvant arm.[10,25]Two smaller studies, with 78 and 91 patients each, have shown similar results.[26,27] The role of adjuvant hormonal therapy in patients with locally advanced disease has been analyzed by the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (AHCPR; now the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality).  Randomized clinical trial evidence comparing radiation therapy with radiation therapy with prolonged androgen suppression (with an LH-RH agonist or orchiectomy) was evaluated in a meta-analysis. Most patients had more advanced disease, but patients with bulky T2b tumors were included in the study.[11][Level of evidence A1] The meta-analysis found a difference in 5-year OS in favor of radiation therapy plus continued androgen suppression compared with radiation therapy alone (HR, 0.631; 95% CI, 0.479–0.831).[11] Additionally, the RTOG did a study (RTOG-8610) in patients with bulky local disease (T2b, T2c, T3, or T4), with or without nodal involvement below the common iliac chain: 456 men were randomly assigned to receive either radiation therapy alone or radiation therapy with androgen ablation, which was  started 8 weeks before radiation therapy and continued for 16 weeks. This trial assessed only short-term hormonal therapy, not long-term therapy, as the studies analyzed by the AHCPR did.[12,28]At 10 years, OS was not statistically significantly different; however, disease-specific mortality rates (23% vs. 36%) and DFS rates (11% vs. 3%) favored the combined treatment arm.[12][Level of evidence A1] A subset analysis of the RTOG-8610 trial and the RTOG-8531 trial that involved 575 patients with T3, N0, M0 disease indicated that long-term hormones compared with short-term hormones resulted in improved biochemical DFS and cause-specific survival.[29] This finding was confirmed by RTOG-9202 (NCT00767286), which reported that radiation therapy plus 28 months of androgen deprivation resulted in longer 10-year disease-specific survival rates (23% vs. 13%; P < .0001) but not OS rates (53.9% vs. 51.6%; P = .36).[13]An unplanned post-hoc subgroup analysis found increased OS with longer androgen deprivation (28 months vs. 4 months) (45% vs. 32%; P = .0061) in men with high-grade cancers and Gleason scores of 8 through 10. In a randomized, prospective clinical trial, 18 months of androgen suppression with an LH-RH agonist appears to have provided results that were similar to 36 months with respect to OS and disease-specific survival.[30][Level of evidence A1] In the trial, 630 men with stage II to stage IVA cancer (clinical stage T3–T4, or PSA >20 ng/ml, or Gleason score >7) received 70 Gy of radiation in 35 fractions alone plus a total of either 18 or 36 months of goserelin acetate.	With a median follow-up of 9.4 years, OS was nearly identical in each study arm (62% at 10 years; HRdeath, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.81–1.29, P = .8), as was prostate cancer–specific survival (HRprostate death, 0.95; 95% CI, 0.58–1.55, P = .8).	Global quality of life was nearly identical on both study arms, but sexual activity and interest in sex was moderately better in the 18-month arm.[30][Level of evidence A3] Likewise, a meta-analysis of seven randomized controlled trials comparing early hormonal treatment  (adjuvant or neoadjuvant) with deferred hormonal treatment (LH-RH agonists and/or antiandrogens) in patients with locally advanced prostate cancer, whether treated by prostatectomy, radiation therapy, or watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring, showed improved overall mortality for patients receiving early treatment (relative risk, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.82–0.91).[31][Level of evidence A1] The duration of neoadjuvant hormonal therapy has been tested in a randomized trial (TROG 96.01 [ACTRN12607000237482])  involving 818 men with locally advanced (T2b, T2c, T3, and T4) nonmetastatic cancer treated with radiation therapy (i.e., 66 Gy in 2 Gy daily fractions to the prostate and seminal vesicles but not including regional lymph nodes). In an open-label design, patients were randomly assigned to radiation therapy alone, 3 months of neoadjuvant androgen deprivation therapy (NADT) (goserelin 3.6 mg subcutaneously each month plus flutamide 250 mg PO  tid) for 2 months before and during radiation, or 6 months of NADT for 5 months before and during radiation.[14][Level of evidence A1] After a median follow-up of 10.6 years, there were no statistically significant differences between the radiation-alone group and the radiation plus 3 months of NADT group.However, the 6-month NADT arm showed better prostate cancer-specific mortality and overall mortality than radiation alone; 10-year all-cause mortality 29.2% versus 42.5% (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.48–0.83, P = .0008). The duration of neoadjuvant hormonal therapy was tested in another trial (RTOG-9910 [NCT00005044]) of 1,489 eligible men with intermediate-risk prostate cancer (T1b–4, Gleason score 2–6, and PSA >10 but ≤100 ng/mL; T1b–4, Gleason score 7, and PSA <20; or T1b–1c, Gleason score 8–10, and PSA <20) and no evidence of metastases.  The men were randomly assigned to receive short-course neoadjuvant–androgen suppression (an LH-RH agonist plus bicalutamide or flutamide for 8 weeks before and  8 weeks during radiation therapy) or long-course neoadjuvant–androgen suppression  (28 weeks before and 8 weeks during radiation therapy).  Both groups received 70.2 Gy radiation in 39 daily fractions to the prostate and 46.8 Gy to the iliac lymph nodes.[32][Level of evidence A1] After a median of 9.4 years, 10-year prostate-specific mortality, the primary end point, was low in both study arms: 5% versus 4% (HR, 0.81; 95% CI,  0.48–1.39).[32][Level of evidence A1]	No statistically significant differences in overall mortality or in locoregional disease progression were found.[32][Level of evidence A1]	There was also no apparent differential effect of androgen suppression duration among any of the risk-group subsets. At 10 years, both overall mortality (29.6% vs. 39.4%; 95% confidence interval [CI] for the difference, 0.8%–8.8%) and the prostate cancer-specific mortality (11.9% vs. 23.9%; 95% CI for the difference,  4.9%–19.1%) favored combined hormonal and radiation therapy. Although flutamide might not be considered a standard hormonal monotherapy in the setting of T2 or T3 tumors,  radiation therapy provided a DFS or tumor-specific survival advantage even though this monotherapy was applied.  This analysis rests on the assumption that flutamide does not shorten life expectancy and cancer-specific survival.  Radiation therapy was not delivered by current standards of dose and technique. At a median follow-up of 8 years (maximum, 13 years), OS was superior in the ADT-plus-radiation therapy  group (hazard ratio [HR]death,  0.77; 95% CI, 0.57–0.85, P = .001). The OS rate at 10 years was 55%  for the ADT-plus-radiation therapy  group versus 49% for the ADT-alone group. Although radiation therapy  had the expected bowel and urinary side effects, quality of life (QOL) was the same in each study group by 24 months and beyond.[23] The actuarial 10-year OS rate for the entire population of 945 analyzable patients was 49% on the adjuvant arm versus 39% on the observation arm (P = .002). There was also an improved actuarial 10-year local failure rate (23% vs. 38%, P < .001). The Kaplan-Meier estimates of OS rates at 10 years were 58.1% in the adjuvant goserelin arm and 39.8% in the radiation alone arm (P = .0004). Similarly, 10-year DFS rates (47.7% vs. 22.7%, P < .0001) and local control rates (94.0% vs. 76.5%, P < .001) favored the adjuvant arm.[10,25] Two smaller studies, with 78 and 91 patients each, have shown similar results.[26,27] The meta-analysis found a difference in 5-year OS in favor of radiation therapy plus continued androgen suppression compared with radiation therapy alone (HR, 0.631; 95% CI, 0.479–0.831).[11] At 10 years, OS was not statistically significantly different; however, disease-specific mortality rates (23% vs. 36%) and DFS rates (11% vs. 3%) favored the combined treatment arm.[12][Level of evidence A1] An unplanned post-hoc subgroup analysis found increased OS with longer androgen deprivation (28 months vs. 4 months) (45% vs. 32%; P = .0061) in men with high-grade cancers and Gleason scores of 8 through 10. With a median follow-up of 9.4 years, OS was nearly identical in each study arm (62% at 10 years; HRdeath, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.81–1.29, P = .8), as was prostate cancer–specific survival (HRprostate death, 0.95; 95% CI, 0.58–1.55, P = .8). Global quality of life was nearly identical on both study arms, but sexual activity and interest in sex was moderately better in the 18-month arm.[30][Level of evidence A3] After a median follow-up of 10.6 years, there were no statistically significant differences between the radiation-alone group and the radiation plus 3 months of NADT group. However, the 6-month NADT arm showed better prostate cancer-specific mortality and overall mortality than radiation alone; 10-year all-cause mortality 29.2% versus 42.5% (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.48–0.83, P = .0008). After a median of 9.4 years, 10-year prostate-specific mortality, the primary end point, was low in both study arms: 5% versus 4% (HR, 0.81; 95% CI,  0.48–1.39).[32][Level of evidence A1] No statistically significant differences in overall mortality or in locoregional disease progression were found.[32][Level of evidence A1] There was also no apparent differential effect of androgen suppression duration among any of the risk-group subsets. Hormonal manipulations (orchiectomy or LH-RH agonists) may be used in the treatment of stage III prostate cancer.[33][Level of evidence A1] Some data suggest that the efficacy of orchiectomy or LH-RH agonists may be enhanced by the addition of abiraterone acetate in men with locally advanced tumors.  In the randomized, open-label, STAMPEDE trial (NCT00268476) trial, 1,917 men (about 95% newly diagnosed; about 50% had metastatic disease and about 50% had locally advanced or node-positive disease) were treated with ADT alone or ADT plus abiraterone acetate (1,000 mg PO qd) and prednisolone (5 mg PO qd).[34] Local radiation therapy was mandated after 6 to 9 months for men with node-negative nonmetastatic disease and optional for those with node-positive nonmetastatic disease. Hormone therapy was curtailed at 2 years or until progression. Radiation therapy was planned in about 40% of the study participants. With a median follow-up of 40 months, the 3-year OS rate was 83% in the abiraterone study group compared with 76% in the ADT-only study group (HRdeath, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.52–0.76; P < .001).[34][Level of evidence A1]  Although there was no clear evidence of heterogeneity in relative treatment differences in metastatic disease versus nonmetastatic disease, absolute differences were much smaller in men with nonmetastatic disease and not statistically significant, perhaps because of the  short follow-up (HRdeath, 0.75; 95% CI, 0.49–1.18). The main additional differences in toxicity associated with abiraterone compared with ADT alone were hypertension (5% vs. 1%), mild increase in blood aminotransferase levels (6% vs. <1%), and respiratory disorders (5% vs. 2%). Antiandrogen monotherapy has also been evaluated in men with locally advanced prostate cancer as an alternative to castration. Evidence (nonsteroidal antiandrogen monotherapy vs. surgical or medical castration): A systematic evidence review compared nonsteroidal antiandrogen monotherapy with surgical or medical castration from 11 randomized trials in 3,060 men with locally advanced, metastatic, or recurrent disease after local therapy.[35] Use of nonsteroidal antiandrogens as monotherapy decreased OS and increased the rate of clinical progression and treatment failure.[35][Level of evidence A1] Evidence (orchiectomy vs. LH-RH agonist): In a randomized equivalence study involving 480 men with locally advanced (T3 and T4) disease, those who were treated with castration had a median OS of 70 months, whereas those treated with bicalutamide (150 mg qd) had a median OS of 63.5 months (HR, 1.05; 95% CI, 0.81–1.36); these results failed to meet the prespecified criteria for equivalence.[36][Level of evidence A1] In patients who are not candidates for or who are unwilling to undergo radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy, immediate hormonal therapy has been compared with deferred treatment (i.e., watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring with hormonal therapy at progression). Evidence (immediate vs. deferred hormonal therapy): A randomized trial looked at immediate hormonal treatment (orchiectomy or LH-RH agonist) versus deferred treatment in men with locally advanced or asymptomatic metastatic prostate cancer.[33][Level of evidence A1]	Initial results showed better OS and prostate cancer-specific survival with the immediate treatment. This subsequently lost statistical significance as was recorded in abstract form.[37] The incidence of pathological fractures, spinal cord compression, and ureteric obstruction were also lower in the immediate treatment arm. In another trial, 197 men with stage III or stage IV prostate cancer were randomly assigned to receive bilateral orchiectomy at diagnosis or at the time of symptomatic progression (or at the time of new metastases that  were deemed likely to cause symptoms).[38][Level of evidence A1]No statistically significant difference in OS was seen over a 12-year period of follow-up. In the EORTC-30891 trial (NCT01819285), 985 patients  newly diagnosed with prostate cancer, stage T0–4, N0–2, M0, and a median age of 73 years were randomly assigned to receive androgen deprivation, either immediately or on symptomatic disease progression.  The study was designed to demonstrate the noninferiority of deferred treatment as compared with immediate treatment in relation to OS.[39][Level of evidence A1]At a median follow-up of 7.8 years, approximately 50% of the patients in the deferred treatment group had initiated androgen deprivation.The median OS in the immediate treatment group was 7.4 years, and,  in the deferred treatment group, it  was 6.5 years, corresponding to a mortality HR of 1.25 (95%  CI, 1.05–1.48), which failed to meet the criteria for noninferiority. Initial results showed better OS and prostate cancer-specific survival with the immediate treatment. This subsequently lost statistical significance as was recorded in abstract form.[37] The incidence of pathological fractures, spinal cord compression, and ureteric obstruction were also lower in the immediate treatment arm. No statistically significant difference in OS was seen over a 12-year period of follow-up. At a median follow-up of 7.8 years, approximately 50% of the patients in the deferred treatment group had initiated androgen deprivation. The median OS in the immediate treatment group was 7.4 years, and,  in the deferred treatment group, it  was 6.5 years, corresponding to a mortality HR of 1.25 (95%  CI, 1.05–1.48), which failed to meet the criteria for noninferiority. When used as the primary therapy for patients with stage III or stage IV prostate cancer, androgen suppression with hormonal therapy is usually given continuously until there is disease progression.  Some investigators have proposed intermittent androgen suppression as a strategy to attain maximal tumor cytoreduction followed by a period without therapy to allow tumor repopulation by hormone-sensitive cells.  Theoretically, this strategy might provide tumor hormone responsiveness for a longer period. An animal model suggested that intermittent androgen deprivation (IAD) could prolong the duration of androgen dependence of hormone-sensitive tumors.[40] Evidence (continuous vs. intermittent hormonal therapy): A systematic review of 15 randomized trials that compared  continuous androgen deprivation versus IAD therapy for patients with advanced or recurrent prostate cancer found no significant difference in OS, which was reported in eight of the trials (HR, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.93–1.11); prostate–cancer-specific survival, reported in five of the trials (HR, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.87–1.19); or progression-free survival, reported in four of the trials (HR, 0.94; 95% CI, 0.84–1.05).  The meta-analysis fulfilled prespecified criteria for noninferiority of OS (upper bound of 1.15 for the HRdeath, 1.15).[41][Level of evidence A1]  However, of the 15 trials, all but one had an unclear or high risk of bias according to prespecified criteria.	There was minimal difference in patient-reported QOL, but most trials found better physical and sexual functioning in patients in the IAD arms. There was minimal difference in patient-reported QOL, but most trials found better physical and sexual functioning in patients in the IAD arms. Radical prostatectomy may be used  with or without EBRT (in highly selected
patients).[42] Because about 40% to 50% of men with clinically organ-confined disease are found to have pathological extension beyond the prostate capsule or surgical margins, the role of postprostatectomy adjuvant radiation therapy has been studied. Evidence (radical prostatectomy with or without EBRT): In a randomized trial of 425 men with pathological T3, N0, M0 disease, postsurgical EBRT (60–64 Gy to the prostatic fossa over 30–32 fractions) was compared with observation.[43,44]After a median follow-up of about 12.5 years, OS was better in the radiation therapy arm; HRdeath, 0.72 (95% CI, 0.55–0.96; P = .023). The 10-year estimated survival rates were 74% in the radiation therapy arm and 66% in the  control arm.The 10-year estimated metastasis-free survival rates were 73% and 65% (P = .016).[44][Level of evidence A1]Short-term complication rates were substantially higher in the radiation therapy group:  overall complications were 23.8% versus 11.9%, rectal complications were 3.3% versus 0%, and urethral stricture was 17.8% versus 9.5%.The role of
preoperative (neoadjuvant) hormonal therapy is not established.[45,46] Also, the morphologic changes induced by neoadjuvant androgen
ablation may even complicate assessment of surgical margins and capsular
involvement.[47] After a median follow-up of about 12.5 years, OS was better in the radiation therapy arm; HRdeath, 0.72 (95% CI, 0.55–0.96; P = .023). The 10-year estimated survival rates were 74% in the radiation therapy arm and 66% in the  control arm. The 10-year estimated metastasis-free survival rates were 73% and 65% (P = .016).[44][Level of evidence A1] Short-term complication rates were substantially higher in the radiation therapy group:  overall complications were 23.8% versus 11.9%, rectal complications were 3.3% versus 0%, and urethral stricture was 17.8% versus 9.5%. The role of
preoperative (neoadjuvant) hormonal therapy is not established.[45,46] Also, the morphologic changes induced by neoadjuvant androgen
ablation may even complicate assessment of surgical margins and capsular
involvement.[47] Careful observation without further immediate treatment may be used in the treatment of stage III prostate cancer.[48,49] Asymptomatic patients of advanced age or with concomitant illness may warrant consideration of careful observation without immediate active treatment.[50-52] Watch and wait, observation, expectant management, and active surveillance/active monitoring are terms indicating a strategy that does not employ immediate therapy with curative intent. For more information, see the Treatment Option Overview for Prostate Cancer section. Because many stage III patients have urinary symptoms, control of symptoms is an
important consideration in treatment. The following modalities may be used to improve local control of disease and subsequent symptoms: Radiation therapy. Hormonal manipulation. Palliative surgery  (transurethral resection of the prostate [TURP]). Interstitial implantation combined with EBRT. Alternative forms of radiation therapy  (under clinical evaluation). Ultrasound-guided percutaneous cryosurgery (under clinical evaluation). Radiation therapy may be used.[3-6]  EBRT designed to
decrease exposure of normal tissues using methods such as computed tomography–based 3-dimensional conformal radiation therapy treatment planning is under clinical evaluation. Hormonal manipulations effectively used as initial therapy for prostate cancer include the following: Orchiectomy. Leuprolide or other LH-RH agonists (e.g., goserelin) in daily or depot
preparations. These agents may be associated with tumor flare. Estrogens (diethylstilbestrol [DES] is no longer available in the
United States). Nonsteroidal antiandrogens (e.g., flutamide, nilutamide,
and bicalutamide) or steroidal antiandrogen (e.g., cyproterone acetate). A meta-analysis of randomized trials comparing various hormonal monotherapies
in men with stage III or stage IV prostate cancer (predominantly stage IV) came to
the following conclusions:[53][Level of evidence A1] The OS at 2 years using any of the LH-RH agonists was
similar to treatment with orchiectomy or 3 mg qd of DES  (HR,  1.26; 95% CI,  0.92–1.39). Survival rates at 2 years were similar or worse with nonsteroidal
antiandrogens compared with orchiectomy (HR, 1.22; 95% 
CI,  0.99–1.50). Treatment withdrawals, used as a surrogate for adverse effects,
occurred less with LH-RH agonists (0%–4%) than with nonsteroidal
antiandrogens (4%–10%). Interstitial implantation combined with EBRT is
being used in selected T3 patients, but little information is available.[54] Alternative forms of radiation therapy are being employed in clinical trials. A
randomized trial from the RTOG reported improved local control and survival
with mixed-beam (neutron/photon) radiation therapy compared with standard photon
radiation therapy.[55] A subsequent randomized study from the same group
compared fast-neutron radiation therapy with standard photon radiation therapy. 
Local-regional control was improved with neutron treatment, but no difference in
 OS was seen, although follow-up was shorter in this trial. 
Fewer complications were seen with the use of a multileaf collimator.[56] Proton-beam radiation therapy is also under investigation.[57] Ultrasound-guided percutaneous cryosurgery is under clinical evaluation. Cryosurgery is a surgical technique under development that involves destruction of prostate
cancer cells by intermittent freezing of the prostate  with cryoprobes,
followed by thawing.[58][Level of evidence C1]; [59]; [60][Level of evidence C3] Cryosurgery is less well
established than standard prostatectomy, and long-term outcomes are not as well established as with prostatectomy or radiation therapy. 
Serious toxic effects  include bladder outlet injury, urinary incontinence, sexual impotence, and rectal injury. The technique of cryosurgery is under
development. Impotence is common. The frequency of other side effects and the probability of cancer control after 5 years of follow-up have varied among reporting centers, and series are small compared with surgery and radiation therapy.[59,60] Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Prostate. In: Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al., eds.: AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 8th ed. Springer; 2017, pp. 715–26. Paulson DF: Management of prostate malignancy. In: deKernion JB, Paulson DF, eds.: Genitourinary Cancer Management. Lea and Febiger, 1987, pp 107-160. Babaian RJ, Zagars GK, Ayala AG: Radiation therapy of stage C prostate cancer: significance of Gleason grade to survival. Semin Urol 8 (4): 225-31, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] del Regato JA, Trailins AH, Pittman DD: Twenty years follow-up of patients with inoperable cancer of the prostate (stage C) treated by radiotherapy: report of a national cooperative study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 26 (2): 197-201, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Pilepich MV, Johnson RJ, Perez CA, et al.: Prognostic significance of nodal involvement in locally advanced (stage C) carcinoma of prostate--RTOG experience. Urology 30 (6): 535-40, 1987. [PUBMED Abstract] Perez CA, Garcia D, Simpson JR, et al.: Factors influencing outcome of definitive radiotherapy for localized carcinoma of the prostate. Radiother Oncol 16 (1): 1-21, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Freeman JA, Lieskovsky G, Cook DW, et al.: Radical retropubic prostatectomy and postoperative adjuvant radiation for pathological stage C (PcN0) prostate cancer from 1976 to 1989: intermediate findings. J Urol 149 (5): 1029-34, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Kumar S, Shelley M, Harrison C, et al.: Neo-adjuvant and adjuvant hormone therapy for localised and locally advanced prostate cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev  (4): CD006019, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] D'Amico AV, Chen MH, Renshaw AA, et al.: Androgen suppression and radiation vs radiation alone for prostate cancer: a randomized trial. JAMA 299 (3): 289-95, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Bolla M, Van Tienhoven G, Warde P, et al.: External irradiation with or without long-term androgen suppression for prostate cancer with high metastatic risk: 10-year results of an EORTC randomised study. Lancet Oncol 11 (11): 1066-73, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Seidenfeld J, Samson DJ, Aronson N, et al.: Relative effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of methods of androgen suppression in the treatment of advanced prostate cancer. Evid Rep Technol Assess (Summ)  (4): i-x, 1-246, I1-36, passim, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Roach M, Bae K, Speight J, et al.: Short-term neoadjuvant androgen deprivation therapy and external-beam radiotherapy for locally advanced prostate cancer: long-term results of RTOG 8610. J Clin Oncol 26 (4): 585-91, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Horwitz EM, Bae K, Hanks GE, et al.: Ten-year follow-up of radiation therapy oncology group protocol 92-02: a phase III trial of the duration of elective androgen deprivation in locally advanced prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 26 (15): 2497-504, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Denham JW, Steigler A, Lamb DS, et al.: Short-term neoadjuvant androgen deprivation and radiotherapy for locally advanced prostate cancer: 10-year data from the TROG 96.01 randomised trial. Lancet Oncol 12 (5): 451-9, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Pilepich MV, Caplan R, Byhardt RW, et al.: Phase III trial of androgen suppression using goserelin in unfavorable-prognosis carcinoma of the prostate treated with definitive radiotherapy: report of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group Protocol 85-31. J Clin Oncol 15 (3): 1013-21, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Bolla M, Gonzalez D, Warde P, et al.: Improved survival in patients with locally advanced prostate cancer treated with radiotherapy and goserelin. N Engl J Med 337 (5): 295-300, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Seymore CH, el-Mahdi AM, Schellhammer PF: The effect of prior transurethral resection of the prostate on post radiation urethral strictures and bladder neck contractures. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 12 (9): 1597-600, 1986. [PUBMED Abstract] Roach M, DeSilvio M, Lawton C, et al.: Phase III trial comparing whole-pelvic versus prostate-only radiotherapy and neoadjuvant versus adjuvant combined androgen suppression: Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 9413. J Clin Oncol 21 (10): 1904-11, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Pollack A: A call for more with a desire for less: pelvic radiotherapy with androgen deprivation in the treatment of prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 21 (10): 1899-901, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Widmark A, Klepp O, Solberg A, et al.: Endocrine treatment, with or without radiotherapy, in locally advanced prostate cancer (SPCG-7/SFUO-3): an open randomised phase III trial. Lancet 373 (9660): 301-8, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Warde P, Mason M, Ding K, et al.: Combined androgen deprivation therapy and radiation therapy for locally advanced prostate cancer: a randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet 378 (9809): 2104-11, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Mason MD, Parulekar WR, Sydes MR, et al.: Final Report of the Intergroup Randomized Study of Combined Androgen-Deprivation Therapy Plus Radiotherapy Versus Androgen-Deprivation Therapy Alone in Locally Advanced Prostate Cancer. J Clin Oncol 33 (19): 2143-50, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Brundage M, Sydes MR, Parulekar WR, et al.: Impact of Radiotherapy When Added to Androgen-Deprivation Therapy for Locally Advanced Prostate Cancer: Long-Term Quality-of-Life Outcomes From the NCIC CTG PR3/MRC PR07 Randomized Trial. J Clin Oncol 33 (19): 2151-7, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Pilepich MV, Winter K, Lawton CA, et al.: Androgen suppression adjuvant to definitive radiotherapy in prostate carcinoma--long-term results of phase III RTOG 85-31. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 61 (5): 1285-90, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Bolla M, Collette L, Blank L, et al.: Long-term results with immediate androgen suppression and external irradiation in patients with locally advanced prostate cancer (an EORTC study): a phase III randomised trial. Lancet 360 (9327): 103-6, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Zagars GK, Johnson DE, von Eschenbach AC, et al.: Adjuvant estrogen following radiation therapy for stage C adenocarcinoma of the prostate: long-term results of a prospective randomized study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 14 (6): 1085-91, 1988. [PUBMED Abstract] Granfors T, Modig H, Damber JE, et al.: Combined orchiectomy and external radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone for nonmetastatic prostate cancer with or without pelvic lymph node involvement: a prospective randomized study. J Urol 159 (6): 2030-4, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Pilepich MV, Winter K, John MJ, et al.: Phase III radiation therapy oncology group (RTOG) trial 86-10 of androgen deprivation adjuvant to definitive radiotherapy in locally advanced carcinoma of the prostate. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 50 (5): 1243-52, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Horwitz EM, Winter K, Hanks GE, et al.: Subset analysis of RTOG 85-31 and 86-10 indicates an advantage for long-term vs. short-term adjuvant hormones for patients with locally advanced nonmetastatic prostate cancer treated with radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 49 (4): 947-56, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Nabid A, Carrier N, Martin AG, et al.: Duration of Androgen Deprivation Therapy in High-risk Prostate Cancer: A Randomized Phase III Trial. Eur Urol 74 (4): 432-441, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Boustead G, Edwards SJ: Systematic review of early vs deferred hormonal treatment of locally advanced prostate cancer: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. BJU Int 99 (6): 1383-9, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Pisansky TM, Hunt D, Gomella LG, et al.: Duration of androgen suppression before radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer: radiation therapy oncology group randomized clinical trial 9910. J Clin Oncol 33 (4): 332-9, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Immediate versus deferred treatment for advanced prostatic cancer: initial results of the Medical Research Council Trial. The Medical Research Council Prostate Cancer Working Party Investigators Group. Br J Urol 79 (2): 235-46, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] James ND, de Bono JS, Spears MR, et al.: Abiraterone for Prostate Cancer Not Previously Treated with Hormone Therapy. N Engl J Med 377 (4): 338-351, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Kunath F, Grobe HR, Rücker G, et al.: Non-steroidal antiandrogen monotherapy compared with luteinising hormone-releasing hormone agonists or surgical castration monotherapy for advanced prostate cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev  (6): CD009266, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Iversen P, Tyrrell CJ, Kaisary AV, et al.: Bicalutamide monotherapy compared with castration in patients with nonmetastatic locally advanced prostate cancer: 6.3 years of followup. J Urol 164 (5): 1579-82, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Kirk D: Immediate vs. deferred hormone treatment for prostate cancer:  how safe is androgen deprivation? [Abstract] BJU Int  86 (Suppl 3): 218-58, 2000. Studer UE, Hauri D, Hanselmann S, et al.: Immediate versus deferred hormonal treatment for patients with prostate cancer who are not suitable for curative local treatment: results of the randomized trial SAKK 08/88. J Clin Oncol 22 (20): 4109-18, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Studer UE, Whelan P, Albrecht W, et al.: Immediate or deferred androgen deprivation for patients with prostate cancer not suitable for local treatment with curative intent: European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) Trial 30891. J Clin Oncol 24 (12): 1868-76, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Tombal B: Intermittent androgen deprivation therapy: conventional wisdom versus evidence. Eur Urol 55 (6): 1278-80, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Magnan S, Zarychanski R, Pilote L, et al.: Intermittent vs Continuous Androgen Deprivation Therapy for Prostate Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA Oncol 1 (9): 1261-9, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Walsh PC, Jewett HJ: Radical surgery for prostatic cancer. Cancer 45 (7 Suppl): 1906-11, 1980. [PUBMED Abstract] Thompson IM, Tangen CM, Paradelo J, et al.: Adjuvant radiotherapy for pathologically advanced prostate cancer: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 296 (19): 2329-35, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Thompson IM, Tangen CM, Paradelo J, et al.: Adjuvant radiotherapy for pathological T3N0M0 prostate cancer significantly reduces risk of metastases and improves survival: long-term followup of a randomized clinical trial. J Urol 181 (3): 956-62, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Witjes WP, Schulman CC, Debruyne FM: Preliminary results of a prospective randomized study comparing radical prostatectomy versus radical prostatectomy associated with neoadjuvant hormonal combination therapy in T2-3 N0 M0 prostatic carcinoma. The European Study Group on Neoadjuvant Treatment of Prostate Cancer. Urology 49 (3A Suppl): 65-9, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Fair WR, Cookson MS, Stroumbakis N, et al.: The indications, rationale, and results of neoadjuvant androgen deprivation in the treatment of prostatic cancer: Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center results. Urology 49 (3A Suppl): 46-55, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Bazinet M, Zheng W, Bégin LR, et al.: Morphologic changes induced by neoadjuvant androgen ablation may result in underdetection of positive surgical margins and capsular involvement by prostatic adenocarcinoma. Urology 49 (5): 721-5, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Adolfsson J: Deferred treatment of low grade stage T3 prostate cancer without distant metastases. J Urol 149 (2): 326-8; discussion 328-9, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Stattin P, Holmberg E, Johansson JE, et al.: Outcomes in localized prostate cancer: National Prostate Cancer Register of Sweden follow-up study. J Natl Cancer Inst 102 (13): 950-8, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Chodak GW, Thisted RA, Gerber GS, et al.: Results of conservative management of clinically localized prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 330 (4): 242-8, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Whitmore WF: Expectant management of clinically localized prostatic cancer. Semin Oncol 21 (5): 560-8, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Shappley WV, Kenfield SA, Kasperzyk JL, et al.: Prospective study of determinants and outcomes of deferred treatment or watchful waiting among men with prostate cancer in a nationwide cohort. J Clin Oncol 27 (30): 4980-5, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Seidenfeld J, Samson DJ, Hasselblad V, et al.: Single-therapy androgen suppression in men with advanced prostate cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 132 (7): 566-77, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Blasko JC, Grimm PD, Ragde H: Brachytherapy and Organ Preservation in the Management of Carcinoma of the Prostate. Semin Radiat Oncol 3 (4): 240-249, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Laramore GE, Krall JM, Thomas FJ, et al.: Fast neutron radiotherapy for locally advanced prostate cancer. Final report of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group randomized clinical trial. Am J Clin Oncol 16 (2): 164-7, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Russell KJ, Caplan RJ, Laramore GE, et al.: Photon versus fast neutron external beam radiotherapy in the treatment of locally advanced prostate cancer: results of a randomized prospective trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 28 (1): 47-54, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Shipley WU, Verhey LJ, Munzenrider JE, et al.: Advanced prostate cancer: the results of a randomized comparative trial of high dose irradiation boosting with conformal protons compared with conventional dose irradiation using photons alone. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 32 (1): 3-12, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Robinson JW, Saliken JC, Donnelly BJ, et al.: Quality-of-life outcomes for men treated with cryosurgery for localized prostate carcinoma. Cancer 86 (9): 1793-801, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Donnelly BJ, Saliken JC, Ernst DS, et al.: Prospective trial of cryosurgical ablation of the prostate: five-year results. Urology 60 (4): 645-9, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Aus G, Pileblad E, Hugosson J: Cryosurgical ablation of the prostate: 5-year follow-up of a prospective study. Eur Urol 42 (2): 133-8, 2002. [PUBMED Abstract] Overview Treatment Options for Stage IV Prostate Cancer  Hormonal manipulationsHormonal manipulations with chemotherapyBisphosphonatesExternal-beam radiation therapy (EBRT) with or without hormonal therapyPalliative radiation therapy Palliative surgery with  transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP)Watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoringRadical prostatectomy with immediate orchiectomy Current Clinical Trials Hormonal manipulations Hormonal manipulations with chemotherapy Bisphosphonates External-beam radiation therapy (EBRT) with or without hormonal therapy Palliative radiation therapy Palliative surgery with  transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) Watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring Radical prostatectomy with immediate orchiectomy Stage IV prostate cancer is defined by the American Joint Committee on Cancer's TNM  (tumor, node, metastasis) classification system:[1] Stage IVA Any T, N1, M0, any prostate-specific antigen (PSA), any Gleason. Stage IVB Any T, N0, M1, any PSA, any Gleason. Extraprostatic extension with microscopic bladder neck invasion (T4) is included with T3a. Treatment selection depends on the following factors: Age. Coexisting medical illnesses. Symptoms. The presence of distant metastases (most often bone) or regional lymph node involvement only. The most common symptoms originate from the urinary tract or from bone metastases. Palliation of symptoms from the urinary tract with transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) or radiation therapy and palliation of symptoms from bone metastases with radiation therapy or hormonal therapy are an important part of the management of these patients. Bisphosphonates may also be used for the management of bone metastases.[2] Treatment options for patients with stage IV prostate cancer  include the following: Hormonal manipulations. Hormonal manipulations with chemotherapy. Bisphosphonates. External-beam radiation therapy (EBRT) with or without hormonal therapy. Palliative radiation therapy. Palliative surgery with TURP. Watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring. Radical prostatectomy with immediate orchiectomy (under clinical evaluation). Hormonal treatment is the mainstay of therapy for metastatic prostate cancer. Cure is rarely, if ever, possible, but striking subjective or objective responses to treatment occur in most patients. The cornerstone of hormonal therapy for prostate cancer is medical or surgical castration to stop the production of testosterone by the testes. This is commonly referred to as androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) and can be achieved with bilateral orchiectomy or with administration of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists or antagonists. The most effective purely hormonal approach employs a combination of ADT and one of the following agents: Abiraterone acetate, an inhibitor of cytochrome P450c17, a critical enzyme in androgen biosynthesis. Apalutamide, an androgen receptor antagonist. Enzalutamide, an androgen receptor  antagonist. Randomized controlled trials have reported that  combination therapy with any one of these drugs plus ADT results in longer overall survival than does ADT alone. In the randomized double-blind LATITUDE trial (NCT01715285), 1,199 men with high-risk metastatic castration-sensitive prostate cancer were given ADT plus either abiraterone acetate (1,000 mg PO qd) and prednisone (5 mg PO qd) or ADT plus abiraterone-prednisone placebos.[3] High-risk disease was defined as having at least two of the following three factors: Gleason score of  8 or higher, three or more bone lesions, or measurable visceral metastases. 	After a median follow-up of 30.4 months, the trial was stopped because of a clear overall survival (OS) benefit in the abiraterone study group: median survival not reached versus 34.7 months OS (hazard ratio [HR], 0.62; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.51–0.76; P < .001).[3][Level of evidence A1]	Abiraterone therapy was well tolerated, but there was an increase in the mineralocorticoid effects of grade 3 or 4 hypertension and hypokalemia compared with the placebo study group.A collection of patient-reported outcomes and Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQOL) data showed clinical benefits in pain progression, prostate cancer–related symptoms, fatigue, functional decline, and overall HRQOL in the abiraterone-acetate study group compared with the placebo group.[4][Level of evidence A3] In the randomized open-label STAMPEDE trial (NCT00268476), 1,917 men (about 95% newly diagnosed; about 50% had metastatic disease and about 50% had locally advanced or node-positive disease) were treated with ADT alone or ADT plus abiraterone acetate (1,000 mg PO qd) and prednisolone (5 mg PO qd).[5] Local radiation therapy was mandated after 6 to 9 months for men with node-negative nonmetastatic disease and optional for those with node-positive nonmetastatic disease. Hormone therapy was curtailed at 2 years or until progression. Radiation therapy was planned in about 40% of study participants.	With a median follow-up of 40 months, the 3-year OS rate was 83% in the abiraterone study group compared with 76% in the ADT-only study group (HRdeath, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.52–0.76; P< .001).[5][Level of evidence A1]  Although there was no clear evidence of heterogeneity in relative treatment differences in metastatic disease versus nonmetastatic disease, absolute differences were much smaller in men with nonmetastatic disease and not statistically significant, perhaps because of the  short follow-up (HRdeath, 0.75; 95% CI, 0.49–1.18).  	The main additional differences in toxicity associated with abiraterone compared with ADT alone were hypertension (5% vs. 1%), mild increase in blood aminotransferase levels (6% vs. < 1%), and respiratory disorders (5% vs. 2%). In the randomized, controlled, double-blind phase III TITAN trial (NCT02489318), 1,052 men with metastatic, castration-sensitive prostate cancer were randomly assigned to receive ADT alone or ADT plus either apalutamide (240 mg PO qd) or placebo.[6] The 2-year OS rate was 82.4% in the apalutamide group and 73.5% in the placebo group (HR, 0.67; 95% CI, 0.51−0.89). Radiographic progression-free survival (PFS) was 68.2% in the apalutamide group and 47.5% in the placebo group (HR, 0.48; 95% CI, 0.39−0.60). Grade 3 or 4 adverse events were reported in 42.2% of patients in the apalutamide group and 40.8% of patients in the placebo group. Apalutamide has been associated with an increased risk of seizure, so men with a history of or predisposition to seizures were excluded from this trial. In the randomized, controlled, open-label phase III ENZAMET trial (NCT02446405), 1,125 men with castrate-sensitive prostate cancer were randomly assigned to receive ADT alone or ADT plus enzalutamide (160 mg PO qd).[7] The 3-year OS rate was 80% in the combined-therapy arm and 72% in the ADT monotherapy arm (HR, 0.67; 95% CI, 0.52−0.86). PSA PFS (HR, 0.39, P < .001) and clinical PFS (HR, 0.40; P < .001) were also longer in the combined-therapy arm. Serious adverse events were reported in 42% of patients in the enzalutamide arm compared with 34% in the monotherapy arm. Treatment was discontinued more frequently in the enzalutamide arm (33 vs. 14 events), and seizures and fatigue were more common in the enzalutamide arm: seven men (1%) had seizures in the enzalutamide arm versus none in the ADT-alone arm. Six percent of men in the combined-therapy arm reported grade 3 to 4 fatigue compared with 1% in the ADT-alone arm. After a median follow-up of 30.4 months, the trial was stopped because of a clear overall survival (OS) benefit in the abiraterone study group: median survival not reached versus 34.7 months OS (hazard ratio [HR], 0.62; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.51–0.76; P < .001).[3][Level of evidence A1] Abiraterone therapy was well tolerated, but there was an increase in the mineralocorticoid effects of grade 3 or 4 hypertension and hypokalemia compared with the placebo study group. A collection of patient-reported outcomes and Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQOL) data showed clinical benefits in pain progression, prostate cancer–related symptoms, fatigue, functional decline, and overall HRQOL in the abiraterone-acetate study group compared with the placebo group.[4][Level of evidence A3] With a median follow-up of 40 months, the 3-year OS rate was 83% in the abiraterone study group compared with 76% in the ADT-only study group (HRdeath, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.52–0.76; P< .001).[5][Level of evidence A1]  Although there was no clear evidence of heterogeneity in relative treatment differences in metastatic disease versus nonmetastatic disease, absolute differences were much smaller in men with nonmetastatic disease and not statistically significant, perhaps because of the  short follow-up (HRdeath, 0.75; 95% CI, 0.49–1.18). The main additional differences in toxicity associated with abiraterone compared with ADT alone were hypertension (5% vs. 1%), mild increase in blood aminotransferase levels (6% vs. < 1%), and respiratory disorders (5% vs. 2%). The 2-year OS rate was 82.4% in the apalutamide group and 73.5% in the placebo group (HR, 0.67; 95% CI, 0.51−0.89). Radiographic progression-free survival (PFS) was 68.2% in the apalutamide group and 47.5% in the placebo group (HR, 0.48; 95% CI, 0.39−0.60). Grade 3 or 4 adverse events were reported in 42.2% of patients in the apalutamide group and 40.8% of patients in the placebo group. Apalutamide has been associated with an increased risk of seizure, so men with a history of or predisposition to seizures were excluded from this trial. The 3-year OS rate was 80% in the combined-therapy arm and 72% in the ADT monotherapy arm (HR, 0.67; 95% CI, 0.52−0.86). PSA PFS (HR, 0.39, P < .001) and clinical PFS (HR, 0.40; P < .001) were also longer in the combined-therapy arm. Serious adverse events were reported in 42% of patients in the enzalutamide arm compared with 34% in the monotherapy arm. Treatment was discontinued more frequently in the enzalutamide arm (33 vs. 14 events), and seizures and fatigue were more common in the enzalutamide arm: seven men (1%) had seizures in the enzalutamide arm versus none in the ADT-alone arm. Six percent of men in the combined-therapy arm reported grade 3 to 4 fatigue compared with 1% in the ADT-alone arm. Treatment was discontinued more frequently in the enzalutamide arm (33 vs. 14 events), and seizures and fatigue were more common in the enzalutamide arm: seven men (1%) had seizures in the enzalutamide arm versus none in the ADT-alone arm. Six percent of men in the combined-therapy arm reported grade 3 to 4 fatigue compared with 1% in the ADT-alone arm. Hormonal manipulations effectively used as initial therapy for prostate
cancer include the following:[8] Orchiectomy alone or with an androgen blocker  as seen in the Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG-8894) trial. Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) agonists, such as leuprolide in daily or depot preparations. These agents may be associated with tumor flare when used alone; therefore, the initial concomitant use of
antiandrogens should be considered in the presence of liver pain,
ureteral obstruction, or impending spinal cord compression.[9-12][Level of evidence A1] Leuprolide plus flutamide;[13]  however, the addition of an
antiandrogen to leuprolide has not been clearly shown in a meta-analysis to improve survival.[14] Estrogens (diethylstilboestrol [DES], chlorotrianisene, ethinyl estradiol, conjugated
estrogens-USP  and DES-diphosphate).  DES is no longer commercially available in the United States. In some series, pretreatment levels of PSA were inversely correlated with progression-free duration in patients with metastatic prostate cancer who received hormonal therapy. After hormonal therapy is initiated, a PSA reduction to beneath a detectable level provides information regarding the duration of progression-free status; however, decreases in PSA of less than 80% may not be very predictive.[15] Orchiectomy and estrogens yield similar results, and selection of one or the other depends on patient preference and the morbidity of expected side effects. Estrogens are associated with the development or exacerbation of cardiovascular disease, especially in high doses. DES at a dose of 1 mg qd is not associated with cardiovascular complications as frequent as those found at higher doses; however, the use of DES has decreased because of cardiovascular toxic effects. The psychological implications of orchiectomy are objectionable to many patients, and many will choose an alternative therapy if effective.[16] Combined orchiectomy and estrogens are not indicated to be superior to either treatment administered alone.[17] A large proportion of men experience hot flushes after bilateral orchiectomy or treatment with LH-RH agonists. These hot flashes can persist for years.[18] Varying levels of success in the management of these symptoms have been reported with DES, clonidine, cyproterone acetate, or medroxyprogesterone acetate. After tumor progression on one form of hormonal manipulation, an objective tumor response to any other form is uncommon.[19] Some studies, however, suggest that withdrawal of flutamide (with or without aminoglutethimide administration) is associated with a decline in PSA and that one may need to monitor for this response before initiating new therapy.[20-22] Low-dose prednisone may palliate symptoms in about 33% of cases.[23] Newer hormonal approaches, such as inhibition of androgen receptors, have been shown to improve OS and quality of life (QOL) after tumor progression despite ADT. For more information, see the Treatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer section. Some patients may be asymptomatic and careful observation without further immediate therapy may be appropriate. Evidence (immediate vs. deferred hormonal therapy): A meta-analysis of seven randomized controlled trials comparing early (adjuvant or neoadjuvant) with deferred hormonal treatment (LH-RH agonists and/or antiandrogens) in patients with locally advanced prostate cancer, whether treated with prostatectomy, radiation therapy, or watchful waiting or active surveillance/active monitoring, showed improved overall mortality with early treatment (relative risk, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.82–0.91).[24][Level of evidence A1] In a small, randomized trial of 98 men who underwent radical prostatectomy plus
pelvic lymphadenectomy and were found to have nodal metastases (stage T1–2, N1,
M0), immediate continuous hormonal therapy with the LH-RH agonist goserelin or
with orchiectomy was compared with  deferred therapy until documentation of
disease progression.[25][Level of evidence A1];[26]After a median follow-up of 11.9 years, OS (P = .04) and prostate–cancer-specific  survival (P = .004) were superior in the immediate adjuvant therapy arm. At 10 years, the survival rate in the immediate therapy arm
was about 80% versus about 60% in the deferred therapy arm.[27] Another trial (RTOG-8531) with twice as many randomly assigned patients showed no difference in OS with early versus late hormonal manipulation.[28] Immediate hormonal therapy with goserelin or orchiectomy has also been compared with deferred hormonal therapy for clinical disease progression in a  randomized trial (EORTC-30846) of men with regional lymph node involvement but no clinical evidence of metastases (any T, N+, M0).  None of the 234 men had a  prostatectomy or prostatic radiation therapy.[29][Level of evidence A1] After a median follow-up of 8.7 years, the HR for OS in the deferred versus immediate hormonal therapy arms was 1.23 (95% CI, 0.88–1.71). No statistically significant difference in OS between deferred and immediate hormonal therapy was found, but the trial was underpowered to detect small or modest differences. Immediate hormonal treatment (e.g., orchiectomy or LH-RH agonist) versus deferred treatment (e.g., watchful waiting with hormonal therapy at progression) was examined  in a randomized study in men with locally advanced or asymptomatic metastatic prostate cancer.[30][Level of evidence A1]The initial results showed better OS and prostate–cancer-specific survival with immediate treatment. The incidence of pathological fractures,
spinal cord compression, and ureteric obstruction were also lower in the
immediate treatment arm. In another trial, 197 men with stage III or stage IV prostate cancer were randomly assigned to have a  bilateral orchiectomy at diagnosis or at the time of symptomatic progression (or at the time of new metastases that were deemed likely to cause symptoms).[31][Level of evidence A1] After 12 years of follow-up, no statistically significant difference was observed in OS. After a median follow-up of 11.9 years, OS (P = .04) and prostate–cancer-specific  survival (P = .004) were superior in the immediate adjuvant therapy arm. At 10 years, the survival rate in the immediate therapy arm
was about 80% versus about 60% in the deferred therapy arm.[27] After a median follow-up of 8.7 years, the HR for OS in the deferred versus immediate hormonal therapy arms was 1.23 (95% CI, 0.88–1.71). No statistically significant difference in OS between deferred and immediate hormonal therapy was found, but the trial was underpowered to detect small or modest differences. The initial results showed better OS and prostate–cancer-specific survival with immediate treatment. The incidence of pathological fractures,
spinal cord compression, and ureteric obstruction were also lower in the
immediate treatment arm. After 12 years of follow-up, no statistically significant difference was observed in OS. Approaches using LH-RH agonists or antiandrogens in patients with stage IV
prostate cancer have produced response rates similar to other hormonal
treatments.[9,32] Evidence (LH-RH agonists or antiandrogens): In a randomized trial, the LH-RH agonist leuprolide (1
mg subcutaneously [SQ] qd) was as effective as DES (3
mg PO qd) in any T, any N, M1 patients, but caused less
gynecomastia, nausea and vomiting, and thromboembolisms.[10] In other randomized
studies, the depot LH-RH agonist goserelin was as
effective as orchiectomy [11,33,34] or DES at a dose of 3 mg qd.[32] 
A depot preparation of leuprolide, which is therapeutically
equivalent to daily leuprolide, is available as a monthly or 3-monthly depot. A systematic evidence review compared nonsteroidal antiandrogen monotherapy with surgical or medical castration from 11 randomized trials in 3,060 men with locally advanced, metastatic, or recurrent disease after local therapy.[35] Use of nonsteroidal antiandrogens as monotherapy decreased OS and increased the rate of clinical progression and treatment failure.[35][Level of evidence A1] A small randomized study comparing 1 mg DES PO tid with 250 mg of flutamide tid in patients with metastatic
prostate cancer showed similar response rates with both regimens but superior
survival with DES.  More cardiovascular and/or thromboembolic toxic
effects of borderline statistical significance were associated with DES
treatment.[36][Level of evidence A1]  A variety of combinations of hormonal
therapy have been tested. On the basis that the adrenal glands continue to produce androgens after surgical or medical castration, case series studies were performed in which antiandrogen therapy was added to castration. Promising results from the  case series led to widespread use of the strategy, known as MAB or total androgen blockade. Subsequent randomized controlled trials, however, cast doubt on the efficacy of adding an antiandrogen to castration. Evidence (MAB): In a large, randomized, controlled trial comparing
treatment with bilateral orchiectomy plus either the antiandrogen flutamide or
placebo, no difference in  OS was reported.[37][Level of evidence A1]Although it has been suggested that MAB may improve the more subjective
end point of response rate, prospectively assessed  QOL was worse in
the flutamide arm than in the placebo arm primarily because of more diarrhea and
worse emotional function in the flutamide-treated group.[38][Level of evidence A3] A meta-analysis of 27 randomized trials of 8,275 patients comparing
conventional surgical or medical castration with MAB—castration plus prolonged
use of an antiandrogen such as flutamide, cyproterone acetate, or nilutamide—did not show a statistically significant improvement in survival associated
with MAB.[14][Level of evidence A1]When trials of androgen suppression versus androgen suppression plus either
nilutamide or flutamide were examined in a subset analysis, the absolute
survival rate at 5 years was better for the combined-therapy group (2.9%
better, 95% CI, 0.3–5.5); however, when trials of androgen
suppression versus androgen suppression plus cyproterone acetate were examined,
the absolute survival trend at 5 years was worse for the combined-therapy group
(2.8% worse, 95% CI,  -7.6 to +2.0).[14] The Agency for Health Care Policy and Research   (now the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality) performed a systematic review of the available randomized, clinical trial evidence of single hormonal therapies and total androgen blockade performed by its Technology Evaluation Center, an evidence-based Practice Center of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. A meta-analysis of randomized trials comparing various hormonal monotherapies in men with stage III or stage IV prostate cancer (predominantly stage IV) came to the following conclusions:[39][Level of evidence A1]
OS at 2 years using any of the LH-RH agonists was similar to treatment with orchiectomy or 3 mg every day of DES (HR, 1.26; 95% CI, 0.92–1.39).Survival rates at 2 years were similar or worse with nonsteroidal antiandrogens compared with orchiectomy (HR, 1.22; 95% CI, 0.99–1.50).Treatment withdrawals, used as a surrogate for adverse effects, occurred
less with LH-RH agonists (0%–4%) than with nonsteroidal antiandrogens (4%–10%).Total androgen blockade was of no greater benefit than single hormonal
therapy and with less patient tolerance.  Also, the evidence was judged
insufficient to determine whether men newly diagnosed with asymptomatic
metastatic disease should have immediate androgen suppression therapy or
should have therapy deferred until they have clinical signs or symptoms of
progression.[40] Although it has been suggested that MAB may improve the more subjective
end point of response rate, prospectively assessed  QOL was worse in
the flutamide arm than in the placebo arm primarily because of more diarrhea and
worse emotional function in the flutamide-treated group.[38][Level of evidence A3] When trials of androgen suppression versus androgen suppression plus either
nilutamide or flutamide were examined in a subset analysis, the absolute
survival rate at 5 years was better for the combined-therapy group (2.9%
better, 95% CI, 0.3–5.5); however, when trials of androgen
suppression versus androgen suppression plus cyproterone acetate were examined,
the absolute survival trend at 5 years was worse for the combined-therapy group
(2.8% worse, 95% CI,  -7.6 to +2.0).[14] OS at 2 years using any of the LH-RH agonists was similar to treatment with orchiectomy or 3 mg every day of DES (HR, 1.26; 95% CI, 0.92–1.39). Survival rates at 2 years were similar or worse with nonsteroidal antiandrogens compared with orchiectomy (HR, 1.22; 95% CI, 0.99–1.50). Treatment withdrawals, used as a surrogate for adverse effects, occurred
less with LH-RH agonists (0%–4%) than with nonsteroidal antiandrogens (4%–10%). Total androgen blockade was of no greater benefit than single hormonal
therapy and with less patient tolerance.  Also, the evidence was judged
insufficient to determine whether men newly diagnosed with asymptomatic
metastatic disease should have immediate androgen suppression therapy or
should have therapy deferred until they have clinical signs or symptoms of
progression.[40] When used as the primary therapy for patients with stage III or stage IV prostate cancer, androgen suppression with hormonal therapy is often given continuously until there is disease progression.  Another option is intermittent androgen suppression as a strategy to attain maximal tumor cytoreduction followed by a period without therapy to allow treatment-free periods.  It was proposed that this strategy might provide tumor hormone responsiveness for a longer period.  An animal model suggested that intermittent androgen deprivation (IAD) could prolong the duration of androgen dependence of hormone-sensitive tumors.[41] However, randomized controlled trials in humans have failed to support the hypothesis that IAD would delay the development of castration-resistant disease. If there are benefits from IAD, they appear to be in the realm of physical and sexual functioning. Evidence (continuous vs. intermittent hormonal therapy): A systematic review of 15 randomized trials that compared  continuous ADT versus IAD therapy for patients with advanced or recurrent prostate cancer found no significant difference in OS, which was reported in eight of the trials (HR, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.93–1.11); prostate cancer-specific survival, reported in five of the trials (HR, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.87–1.19); or PFS, reported in four of the trials (HR, 0.94; 95% CI, 0.84–1.05).  The meta-analysis fulfilled prespecified criteria for noninferiority of OS (upper bound of 1.15 for the HRdeath, 1.15).[42][Level of evidence A1]  However, of the 15 trials, all but one had an unclear or high risk of bias according to prespecified criteria.	There was minimal difference in patient-reported QOL, but most trials found better physical and sexual functioning in patients in the IAD arms.  There was minimal difference in patient-reported QOL, but most trials found better physical and sexual functioning in patients in the IAD arms. The addition of chemotherapy has been shown in randomized trials to improve OS compared with ADT alone, with efficacy that appears to be comparable with hormonal therapy, which includes ADT plus abiraterone acetate.  However, the two approaches have not been directly compared in a randomized study. The addition of docetaxel has been tested in combination with long-term hormone therapy in the first-line management of metastatic prostate cancer and has been shown to improve results more than hormone therapy alone.  A systematic  evidence review and meta-analysis of randomized trials in hormone-sensitive metastatic prostate cancer summarizes these data.[43] Evidence (hormonal manipulations with chemotherapy): In the analysis of three randomized trials (3,206 men), the HRdeath associated with the addition of docetaxel to standard of care was 0.77 (95% CI, 0.68–0.87; P < .0001), representing an absolute improvement of 9% in 4-year survival (95% CI, 5–14).[43][Level of evidence A1] In the CHAARTED trial (NCT00309985), 790 patients with metastatic, hormone-sensitive disease were randomly assigned to receive ADT with or without docetaxel (75 mg/m2 intravenously [IV] every 3 weeks for 6 cycles).[44,45] Previous adjuvant ADT was permissible if it lasted 12 months or less and progression had occurred within 12 months of completion.  Patients were prospectively stratified as having a  high- versus low-volume disease, with high volume defined as presence of visceral metastases or at least four bone lesions, with at least one lying outside the vertebral column or pelvis.  About 65% of patients had high-volume disease by this definition. With a median follow-up of 53.7 months, median OS in the ADT-plus-docetaxel arm was 57.6 months and in the ADT-alone arm, it was 47.2 months (HRdeath, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.59–0.89; P =   .0018).[45][Level of evidence A1]  The survival advantage was observed only in patients with high-volume disease. 	In the group with high-volume disease, there was a clear improvement in median OS (61.2 months vs. 34.4 months) (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.50–0.79; P < .001). However, there was no observed difference in survival in men with low-volume disease (median OS, 63.5 months vs. not reached) (HR, 1.04; 95% CI, 0.70–1.55; P = .86).  The test for heterogeneity of efficacy was statistically significant (P = .033).	Comparison of QOL between the two study groups, as measured by the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Prostate (FACT-P) scale, was not found to exceed the prospectively defined minimally important difference at any time point over the 12 months of planned assessment.[46] With a median follow-up of 53.7 months, median OS in the ADT-plus-docetaxel arm was 57.6 months and in the ADT-alone arm, it was 47.2 months (HRdeath, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.59–0.89; P =   .0018).[45][Level of evidence A1] The survival advantage was observed only in patients with high-volume disease. 	In the group with high-volume disease, there was a clear improvement in median OS (61.2 months vs. 34.4 months) (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.50–0.79; P < .001). However, there was no observed difference in survival in men with low-volume disease (median OS, 63.5 months vs. not reached) (HR, 1.04; 95% CI, 0.70–1.55; P = .86).  The test for heterogeneity of efficacy was statistically significant (P = .033). Comparison of QOL between the two study groups, as measured by the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Prostate (FACT-P) scale, was not found to exceed the prospectively defined minimally important difference at any time point over the 12 months of planned assessment.[46] In addition to hormonal therapy, adjuvant treatment with bisphosphonates has been tested.[47] Evidence (bisphosphonates): In MRC-PR05, 311 men with bone metastases who were starting or responding to standard hormonal therapy were randomly assigned to oral sodium clodronate (2,080 mg qd) or a matching placebo for up to 3 years.[47][Level of evidence A1]At a median follow-up of 11.5 years, OS was better in the clodronate arm: HRdeath,   0.77 (95% CI, 0.60–0.98; P = .032). Five- and 10-year survival rates were 30% and 17% in the clodronate arm versus 21% and 9% in the placebo arm. A parallel study (MRC-PR04) in men with locally advanced but nonmetastatic disease showed  no benefit associated with clodronate. CALGB-90202 [NCT00079001] was a randomized controlled trial that compared  zoledronic acid (4 mg IV every 4 weeks) with placebo in 645 men with androgen deprivation-sensitive prostate cancer that was metastatic to bone. Patients who progressed on hormone-therapy resistance received open-label, zoledronic acid.[48][Level of evidence B1] There was no difference between the two study arms in risk of the primary end point of time to skeletal-related events (defined as the need for palliative bone radiation, clinical fracture, spinal cord compression, bone surgery, or death from prostate cancer) after up to 7 years of follow-up.  There were also no differences in PFS or OS. In another negative randomized trial (STAMPEDE [NCT00268476]), 1,245 men with locally advanced (M0) or metastatic (M1) prostate cancer, who were initiating long-term hormonal therapy, were randomly assigned to one of three arms (ratio of 2:1:1): standard of care, celecoxib (400 mg bid for 1 year), and celecoxib plus zoledronic acid (4 mg IV for six 3-week cycles, then 4-week cycles for 2 years).[49]	After a median follow-up of 69 months, there was no detectable improvement in survival associated with either celecoxib or celecoxib plus zoledronic acid.	Although survival was better in patients with M disease who received  celecoxib plus zoledronic acid than in patients with M1 disease who received the standard of care (HRdeath, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.62–0.98), a formal test for interaction with metastasis status was not statistically significant; therefore,  the unexpected finding can only be considered hypothesis-generating. At a median follow-up of 11.5 years, OS was better in the clodronate arm: HRdeath,   0.77 (95% CI, 0.60–0.98; P = .032). Five- and 10-year survival rates were 30% and 17% in the clodronate arm versus 21% and 9% in the placebo arm. There was no difference between the two study arms in risk of the primary end point of time to skeletal-related events (defined as the need for palliative bone radiation, clinical fracture, spinal cord compression, bone surgery, or death from prostate cancer) after up to 7 years of follow-up. There were also no differences in PFS or OS. After a median follow-up of 69 months, there was no detectable improvement in survival associated with either celecoxib or celecoxib plus zoledronic acid. Although survival was better in patients with M disease who received  celecoxib plus zoledronic acid than in patients with M1 disease who received the standard of care (HRdeath, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.62–0.98), a formal test for interaction with metastasis status was not statistically significant; therefore,  the unexpected finding can only be considered hypothesis-generating. Patients with locally advanced  nonmetastatic disease (T2–T4, N0–N1, and M0) are at risk of developing bone metastases, and bisphosphonates are being studied as a strategy to decrease this risk.  However, a placebo-controlled randomized trial (MRC-PR04) of a 5-year regimen of the first-generation bisphosphonate clodronate in high oral doses (2,080 mg qd) had no favorable impact on either time to symptomatic bone metastasis or survival.[50][Level of evidence A1] EBRT   may be used for attempted cure in highly selected stage M0
patients.[51,52]  Definitive radiation therapy should be delayed 4 to 6 weeks
after TURP to reduce incidence of stricture.[53] Hormonal therapy should be considered in addition to EBRT.[40,54] Evidence (radiation therapy with or without hormonal therapy): The Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association Technology Evaluation Center, an evidence-based practice center of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), performed a systematic review of the available randomized clinical trial evidence comparing radiation therapy with radiation therapy and prolonged androgen suppression.[40][Level of evidence A1] Some patients with bulky T2b tumors were included in the studied groups.The meta-analysis found a difference in 5-year OS in favor of radiation therapy plus continued androgen suppression using an LH-RH agonist or orchiectomy compared with radiation therapy alone (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.48–0.83). In a randomized, prospective clinical trial, 18 months of androgen suppression with an LH-RH agonist appears to have provided results that were similar to 36 months with respect to OS and disease-specific survival.[55][Level of evidence A1] In the trial, 630 men with stage II to stage IVA cancer (clinical stage T3–T4, or PSA >20 ng/ml, or Gleason score >7) received 70 Gy of radiation in 35 fractions alone plus a total of either 18 or 36 months of goserelin acetate.	With a median follow-up of 9.4 years, OS was nearly identical in each study arm (62% at 10 years; HRdeath, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.81–1.29, P = .8), as was prostate cancer–specific survival (HRprostate death, 0.95; 95% CI, 0.58–1.55, P = .8).	Global quality of life was nearly identical on both study arms, but sexual activity and interest in sex was moderately better in the 18-month arm.[55][Level of evidence A3] The optimal duration of neoadjuvant hormonal therapy has been studied. In a randomized trial (TROG 96.01 [ACTRN12607000237482])  of 818 men with locally advanced (T2b, T2c, T3, and T4), nonmetastatic cancer treated with radiation therapy (i.e., 66 Gy in 2 Gy daily fractions to the prostate and seminal vesicles but not including regional nodes). Patients were randomly assigned to radiation therapy alone, 3 months of neoadjuvant androgen deprivation therapy (NADT) (goserelin 3.6 mg SQ each month plus flutamide 250 mg PO tid) for 2 months before and during radiation, or 6 months of NADT for 5 months before and during radiation.[54][Level of evidence A1]After a median follow-up of 10.6 years, there were no statistically significant differences between the radiation alone group and the radiation plus 3 months of NADT group.However, the 6-month NADT arm showed better prostate cancer-specific mortality and overall mortality than radiation alone; 10-year all-cause mortality 29.2% versus 42.5% (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.48–0.83, P = .0008). The duration of neoadjuvant hormonal therapy was tested in another trial (RTOG-9910 [NCT00005044]) of 1,489 eligible men with intermediate-risk prostate cancer (T1b–4, Gleason score 2–6, and PSA >10 but ≤100 ng/mL; T1b–4, Gleason score 7, and PSA <20; or T1b–1c, Gleason score 8–10, and PSA <20) and no evidence of metastases.  The men were randomly assigned to receive short-course neoadjuvant–androgen suppression (an LH-RH agonist plus bicalutamide or flutamide for 8 weeks before and  8 weeks during radiation therapy) or long-course neoadjuvant-androgen suppression (28 weeks before and 8 weeks during radiation therapy).  Both groups received 70.2 Gy radiation in 39 daily fractions to the prostate and 46.8 Gy to the iliac lymph nodes.[56][Level of evidence A1] After a median of 9.4 years, 10-year prostate specific mortality, the primary end point, was low in both study arms: 5% versus 4% (HR, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.48–1.39).[56][Level of evidence A1]	No statistically significant differences in overall mortality or in locoregional disease progression were found.[56][Level of evidence A1]	There was also no apparent differential effect of androgen suppression duration among any of the risk-group subsets. The meta-analysis found a difference in 5-year OS in favor of radiation therapy plus continued androgen suppression using an LH-RH agonist or orchiectomy compared with radiation therapy alone (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.48–0.83). With a median follow-up of 9.4 years, OS was nearly identical in each study arm (62% at 10 years; HRdeath, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.81–1.29, P = .8), as was prostate cancer–specific survival (HRprostate death, 0.95; 95% CI, 0.58–1.55, P = .8). Global quality of life was nearly identical on both study arms, but sexual activity and interest in sex was moderately better in the 18-month arm.[55][Level of evidence A3] After a median follow-up of 10.6 years, there were no statistically significant differences between the radiation alone group and the radiation plus 3 months of NADT group. However, the 6-month NADT arm showed better prostate cancer-specific mortality and overall mortality than radiation alone; 10-year all-cause mortality 29.2% versus 42.5% (HR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.48–0.83, P = .0008). After a median of 9.4 years, 10-year prostate specific mortality, the primary end point, was low in both study arms: 5% versus 4% (HR, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.48–1.39).[56][Level of evidence A1] No statistically significant differences in overall mortality or in locoregional disease progression were found.[56][Level of evidence A1] There was also no apparent differential effect of androgen suppression duration among any of the risk-group subsets. A single fraction of 8 Gy has been shown to have similar benefits on bone pain relief and QOL as multiple fractions (3 Gy × 10) as was evidenced in the RTOG-9714 trial (NCT00003162).[57]; [58][Level of evidence A3] 
 For more information, see Cancer Pain. Transurethral resection of the prostate may be useful in relieving urinary obstruction as part of palliative care in advanced prostate cancer. Careful observation without further immediate treatment (in selected
asymptomatic patients).[59] An uncontrolled, retrospective review of a large series of
patients with any T, N1–3, M0 disease treated at the Mayo Clinic with concurrent
radical prostatectomy and orchiectomy was associated with  intervals to local
and distant progression; however, increase in OS has not
been demonstrated.[60] Patient selection factors make such study designs difficult to interpret. Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Prostate. In: Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al., eds.: AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 8th ed. Springer; 2017, pp. 715–26. Dearnaley DP, Sydes MR, Mason MD, et al.: A double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trial of oral sodium clodronate for metastatic prostate cancer (MRC PR05 Trial). J Natl Cancer Inst 95 (17): 1300-11, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Fizazi K, Tran N, Fein L, et al.: Abiraterone plus Prednisone in Metastatic, Castration-Sensitive Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 377 (4): 352-360, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Chi KN, Protheroe A, Rodríguez-Antolín A, et al.: Patient-reported outcomes following abiraterone acetate plus prednisone added to androgen deprivation therapy in patients with newly diagnosed metastatic castration-naive prostate cancer (LATITUDE): an international, randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 19 (2): 194-206, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] James ND, de Bono JS, Spears MR, et al.: Abiraterone for Prostate Cancer Not Previously Treated with Hormone Therapy. N Engl J Med 377 (4): 338-351, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Chi KN, Agarwal N, Bjartell A, et al.: Apalutamide for Metastatic, Castration-Sensitive Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 381 (1): 13-24, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Davis ID, Martin AJ, Stockler MR, et al.: Enzalutamide with Standard First-Line Therapy in Metastatic Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 381 (2): 121-131, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Scott WW, Menon M, Walsh PC: Hormonal therapy of prostatic cancer. Cancer 45 (7 Suppl): 1929-36, 1980. [PUBMED Abstract] Parmar H, Edwards L, Phillips RH, et al.: Orchiectomy versus long-acting D-Trp-6-LHRH in advanced prostatic cancer. Br J Urol 59 (3): 248-54, 1987. [PUBMED Abstract] Leuprolide versus diethylstilbestrol for metastatic prostate cancer. The Leuprolide Study Group. N Engl J Med 311 (20): 1281-6, 1984. [PUBMED Abstract] Peeling WB: Phase III studies to compare goserelin (Zoladex) with orchiectomy and with diethylstilbestrol in treatment of prostatic carcinoma. Urology 33 (5 Suppl): 45-52, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Sharifi R, Soloway M: Clinical study of leuprolide depot formulation in the treatment of advanced prostate cancer.The Leuprolide Study Group. J Urol 143 (1): 68-71, 1990. [PUBMED Abstract] Crawford ED, Eisenberger MA, McLeod DG, et al.: A controlled trial of leuprolide with and without flutamide in prostatic carcinoma. N Engl J Med 321 (7): 419-24, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Maximum androgen blockade in advanced prostate cancer: an overview of the randomised trials. Prostate Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group. Lancet 355 (9214): 1491-8, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Matzkin H, Eber P, Todd B, et al.: Prognostic significance of changes in prostate-specific markers after endocrine treatment of stage D2 prostatic cancer. Cancer 70 (9): 2302-9, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Cassileth BR, Soloway MS, Vogelzang NJ, et al.: Patients' choice of treatment in stage D prostate cancer. Urology 33 (5 Suppl): 57-62, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Byar DP: Proceedings: The Veterans Administration Cooperative Urological Research Group's studies of cancer of the prostate. Cancer 32 (5): 1126-30, 1973. [PUBMED Abstract] Karling P, Hammar M, Varenhorst E: Prevalence and duration of hot flushes after surgical or medical castration in men with prostatic carcinoma. J Urol 152 (4): 1170-3, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Small EJ, Vogelzang NJ: Second-line hormonal therapy for advanced prostate cancer: a shifting paradigm. J Clin Oncol 15 (1): 382-8, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Scher HI, Kelly WK: Flutamide withdrawal syndrome: its impact on clinical trials in hormone-refractory prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 11 (8): 1566-72, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Sartor O, Cooper M, Weinberger M, et al.: Surprising activity of flutamide withdrawal, when combined with aminoglutethimide, in treatment of "hormone-refractory" prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 86 (3): 222-7, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Small EJ, Srinivas S: The antiandrogen withdrawal syndrome. Experience in a large cohort of unselected patients with advanced prostate cancer. Cancer 76 (8): 1428-34, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Tannock I, Gospodarowicz M, Meakin W, et al.: Treatment of metastatic prostatic cancer with low-dose prednisone: evaluation of pain and quality of life as pragmatic indices of response. J Clin Oncol 7 (5): 590-7, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Boustead G, Edwards SJ: Systematic review of early vs deferred hormonal treatment of locally advanced prostate cancer: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. BJU Int 99 (6): 1383-9, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Messing EM, Manola J, Sarosdy M, et al.: Immediate hormonal therapy compared with observation after radical prostatectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy in men with node-positive prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 341 (24): 1781-8, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Eisenberger MA, Walsh PC: Early androgen deprivation for prostate cancer? N Engl J Med 341 (24): 1837-8, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Messing EM, Manola J, Yao J, et al.: Immediate versus deferred androgen deprivation treatment in patients with node-positive prostate cancer after radical prostatectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy. Lancet Oncol 7 (6): 472-9, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Lawton CA, Winter K, Grignon D, et al.: Androgen suppression plus radiation versus radiation alone for patients with stage D1/pathologic node-positive adenocarcinoma of the prostate: updated results based on national prospective randomized trial Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 85-31. J Clin Oncol 23 (4): 800-7, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Schröder FH, Kurth KH, Fosså SD, et al.: Early versus delayed endocrine treatment of pN1-3 M0 prostate cancer without local treatment of the primary tumor: results of European Organisation for the Research and Treatment of Cancer 30846--a phase III study. J Urol 172 (3): 923-7, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Immediate versus deferred treatment for advanced prostatic cancer: initial results of the Medical Research Council Trial. The Medical Research Council Prostate Cancer Working Party Investigators Group. Br J Urol 79 (2): 235-46, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Studer UE, Hauri D, Hanselmann S, et al.: Immediate versus deferred hormonal treatment for patients with prostate cancer who are not suitable for curative local treatment: results of the randomized trial SAKK 08/88. J Clin Oncol 22 (20): 4109-18, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Waymont B, Lynch TH, Dunn JA, et al.: Phase III randomised study of zoladex versus stilboestrol in the treatment of advanced prostate cancer. Br J Urol 69 (6): 614-20, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Vogelzang NJ, Chodak GW, Soloway MS, et al.: Goserelin versus orchiectomy in the treatment of advanced prostate cancer: final results of a randomized trial. Zoladex Prostate Study Group. Urology 46 (2): 220-6, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Kaisary AV, Tyrrell CJ, Peeling WB, et al.: Comparison of LHRH analogue (Zoladex) with orchiectomy in patients with metastatic prostatic carcinoma. Br J Urol 67 (5): 502-8, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Kunath F, Grobe HR, Rücker G, et al.: Non-steroidal antiandrogen monotherapy compared with luteinising hormone-releasing hormone agonists or surgical castration monotherapy for advanced prostate cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev  (6): CD009266, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Chang A, Yeap B, Davis T, et al.: Double-blind, randomized study of primary hormonal treatment of stage D2 prostate carcinoma: flutamide versus diethylstilbestrol. J Clin Oncol 14 (8): 2250-7, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Eisenberger MA, Blumenstein BA, Crawford ED, et al.: Bilateral orchiectomy with or without flutamide for metastatic prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 339 (15): 1036-42, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Moinpour CM, Savage MJ, Troxel A, et al.: Quality of life in advanced prostate cancer: results of a randomized therapeutic trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 90 (20): 1537-44, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Seidenfeld J, Samson DJ, Hasselblad V, et al.: Single-therapy androgen suppression in men with advanced prostate cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 132 (7): 566-77, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Seidenfeld J, Samson DJ, Aronson N, et al.: Relative effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of methods of androgen suppression in the treatment of advanced prostate cancer. Evid Rep Technol Assess (Summ)  (4): i-x, 1-246, I1-36, passim, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Calais da Silva FE, Bono AV, Whelan P, et al.: Intermittent androgen deprivation for locally advanced and metastatic prostate cancer: results from a randomised phase 3 study of the South European Uroncological Group. Eur Urol 55 (6): 1269-77, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Magnan S, Zarychanski R, Pilote L, et al.: Intermittent vs Continuous Androgen Deprivation Therapy for Prostate Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA Oncol 1 (9): 1261-9, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Vale CL, Burdett S, Rydzewska LH, et al.: Addition of docetaxel or bisphosphonates to standard of care in men with localised or metastatic, hormone-sensitive prostate cancer: a systematic review and meta-analyses of aggregate data. Lancet Oncol 17 (2): 243-56, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Sweeney CJ, Chen YH, Carducci M, et al.: Chemohormonal Therapy in Metastatic Hormone-Sensitive Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 373 (8): 737-46, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Kyriakopoulos CE, Chen YH, Carducci MA, et al.: Chemohormonal Therapy in Metastatic Hormone-Sensitive Prostate Cancer: Long-Term Survival Analysis of the Randomized Phase III E3805 CHAARTED Trial. J Clin Oncol 36 (11): 1080-1087, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Morgans AK, Chen YH, Sweeney CJ, et al.: Quality of Life During Treatment With Chemohormonal Therapy: Analysis of E3805 Chemohormonal Androgen Ablation Randomized Trial in Prostate Cancer. J Clin Oncol 36 (11): 1088-1095, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Dearnaley DP, Mason MD, Parmar MK, et al.: Adjuvant therapy with oral sodium clodronate in locally advanced and metastatic prostate cancer: long-term overall survival results from the MRC PR04 and PR05 randomised controlled trials. Lancet Oncol 10 (9): 872-6, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Smith MR, Halabi S, Ryan CJ, et al.: Randomized controlled trial of early zoledronic acid in men with castration-sensitive prostate cancer and bone metastases: results of CALGB 90202 (alliance). J Clin Oncol 32 (11): 1143-50, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Mason MD, Clarke NW, James ND, et al.: Adding Celecoxib With or Without Zoledronic Acid for Hormone-Naïve Prostate Cancer: Long-Term Survival Results From an Adaptive, Multiarm, Multistage, Platform, Randomized Controlled Trial. J Clin Oncol 35 (14): 1530-1541, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Mason MD, Sydes MR, Glaholm J, et al.: Oral sodium clodronate for nonmetastatic prostate cancer--results of a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial: Medical Research Council PR04 (ISRCTN61384873). J Natl Cancer Inst 99 (10): 765-76, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Bagshaw MA: External radiation therapy of carcinoma of the prostate. Cancer 45 (7 Suppl): 1912-21, 1980. [PUBMED Abstract] Ploysongsang S, Aron BS, Shehata WM, et al.: Comparison of whole pelvis versus small-field radiation therapy for carcinoma of prostate. Urology 27 (1): 10-6, 1986. [PUBMED Abstract] Seymore CH, el-Mahdi AM, Schellhammer PF: The effect of prior transurethral resection of the prostate on post radiation urethral strictures and bladder neck contractures. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 12 (9): 1597-600, 1986. [PUBMED Abstract] Denham JW, Steigler A, Lamb DS, et al.: Short-term neoadjuvant androgen deprivation and radiotherapy for locally advanced prostate cancer: 10-year data from the TROG 96.01 randomised trial. Lancet Oncol 12 (5): 451-9, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Nabid A, Carrier N, Martin AG, et al.: Duration of Androgen Deprivation Therapy in High-risk Prostate Cancer: A Randomized Phase III Trial. Eur Urol 74 (4): 432-441, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Pisansky TM, Hunt D, Gomella LG, et al.: Duration of androgen suppression before radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer: radiation therapy oncology group randomized clinical trial 9910. J Clin Oncol 33 (4): 332-9, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Kaasa S, Brenne E, Lund JA, et al.: Prospective randomised multicenter trial on single fraction radiotherapy (8 Gy x 1) versus multiple fractions (3 Gy x 10) in the treatment of painful bone metastases. Radiother Oncol 79 (3): 278-84, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Chow E, Harris K, Fan G, et al.: Palliative radiotherapy trials for bone metastases: a systematic review. J Clin Oncol 25 (11): 1423-36, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Stattin P, Holmberg E, Johansson JE, et al.: Outcomes in localized prostate cancer: National Prostate Cancer Register of Sweden follow-up study. J Natl Cancer Inst 102 (13): 950-8, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Zincke H: Extended experience with surgical treatment of stage D1 adenocarcinoma of prostate. Significant influences of immediate adjuvant hormonal treatment (orchiectomy) on outcome. Urology 33 (5 Suppl): 27-36, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Overview Immediate Versus Deferred Hormonal Therapy Hormonal Therapy for Recurring DiseaseContinuous versus intermittent hormonal therapyNonsteroidal antiandrogen monotherapy versus surgical or medical castrationHormonal approachesPrevention of bone metastases Treatment Options for Recurrent Prostate Cancer Chemotherapy for hormone-resistant   prostate cancerImmunotherapyRadiopharmaceutical therapyPARP inhibitors for men with prostate cancer and BRCA1, BRCA2, and/or ATM mutations Current Clinical Trials Continuous versus intermittent hormonal therapy Nonsteroidal antiandrogen monotherapy versus surgical or medical castration Hormonal approaches Prevention of bone metastases Chemotherapy for hormone-resistant   prostate cancer Immunotherapy Radiopharmaceutical therapy PARP inhibitors for men with prostate cancer and BRCA1, BRCA2, and/or ATM mutations In recurrent or hormone-resistant prostate cancer, the selection of further treatment depends on many factors,
including the following: Previous treatment. Site of recurrence. Coexistent illnesses. Individual patient considerations. Definitive radiation therapy can be given
to patients with disease that  fails only locally after prostatectomy.[1-4]  A randomized trial (RTOG-9601 [NCT00002874]) has shown improved overall survival (OS) and prostate–cancer-specific survival with the addition of high-dose bicalutamide to radiation therapy compared with radiation therapy alone in men with locally recurrent prostate cancer after radical prostatectomy.[5] In the trial, 760 men who were initially treated with radical prostatectomy for tumor stage T2 or T3, and who had a detectable prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level of 0.2 to 4.0 ng/mL, but no evidence of metastases, were randomly assigned to receive radiation (64.8 Gy over 36 fractions) and either bicalutamide (150 mg PO qd) or placebo for 24 months.  The median interval from surgery to PSA detectability was 1.4 years and from surgery to randomization was 2.1 years.  Median follow-up was 13 years. Actuarial OS at 12 years was 76.3% in the bicalutamide group versus 71.3% in the placebo group (P = .04; hazard ratio [HR], 0.77; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.59–0.99).[5][Level of evidence A1] Prostate–cancer-specific mortality at 12 years was 5.8% (bicalutamide) versus 13.4% (placebo),  (HR, 0.49; 95% CI, 0.32–0.74; P < .001).[5][Level of evidence A1] Most treatment-related toxicities were similar between the two groups, except for gynecomastia, which occurred in 69.7% of the men on bicalutamide versus 10.9% of those on placebo.  This side effect may be mitigated by prophylactic breast irradiation, which was not used in this study because of the  double-blinded design. Some
patients  with  a local recurrence after
definitive radiation therapy can be salvaged with prostatectomy;[6]  however, only about 10% of patients treated
initially with radiation therapy will have local relapse only.  In these patients,
prolonged disease control is often possible with hormonal therapy, with median
cancer-specific survival of 6 years after local failure.[7] Cryosurgical
ablation of recurrence after radiation therapy is associated frequently with
a high complication rate.  This
technique is still undergoing clinical evaluation.[8] Hormonal therapy is used to manage most relapsing patients with disseminated disease who initially received locoregional therapy with surgery or radiation therapy.  For more information, see the Treatment Options for Stage IV Prostate Cancer  section. For more information on the use of immediate hormonal therapy (bicalutamide or luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone [LH-RH] agonists) plus radiation in the setting of locally recurrent prostate cancer after radical prostatectomy, see the Treatment Option Overview for Prostate Cancer section. PSA is often used to monitor patients after initial therapy with curative intent, and elevated or rising PSA is a common trigger for additional therapy even in asymptomatic men. Despite how common the situation is, it is not clear whether additional treatments given because of rising PSA in asymptomatic men with prostate cancer increase OS.  The quality of evidence is limited. After radical prostatectomy, detectable PSA levels identify patients at elevated risk of local treatment failure or metastatic disease;[9] however, a substantial proportion of patients with elevated or rising PSA levels after initial therapy with curative intent may remain clinically free of symptoms for extended periods.[10] In a retrospective analysis of nearly 2,000 men who had undergone radical prostatectomy with curative intent and who were followed for a mean of 5.3 years,  315 men (15%) demonstrated an abnormal PSA of 0.2 ng/mL or higher, which is evidence of biochemical recurrence.[11]Of these 315 men, 103 men (34%) developed clinical evidence of recurrence.The median time to development of clinical metastasis after biochemical recurrence was 8 years. After the men developed metastatic disease, the median time to death was an additional 5 years. After radiation therapy with curative intent, persistently elevated or rising PSA may be a prognostic factor for clinical disease recurrence. However, reported case series have used a variety of definitions of PSA failure. Criteria have been developed by the American Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology Consensus Panel.[12,13] The implication of the various definitions of PSA failure for OS is not known, and as in the surgical series, many biochemical relapses (rising PSA alone) may not be clinically manifested in patients treated with radiation therapy.[14,15] A randomized trial (PMCC-VCOG-PR-0103 [NCT00110162]) of androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) in men who received curative therapy but have a rising PSA, provides some evidence of improved OS associated with immediate versus delayed therapy.[16] The study had important shortcomings.Two groups of men were randomly assigned to open-label, immediate-versus-delayed (at least 2-year delay) ADT:   Group 1 included men who had a PSA relapse after curative therapy (89% of the study population). Group 2 included asymptomatic men who were considered unsuitable for curative treatment because of age, comorbidity, or locally advanced disease (11% of the study population).Planned accrual was 750 patients, but because of  slow accrual, the trial closed at 293 patients. In groups 1 and 2 combined, with a median follow-up of 5 years, the 5-year OS rate was 86.4% in the delayed ADT study arm versus 91.2% in the immediate ADT study arm (log-rank P = .047).[16][Level of evidence A1]  After full adjustment for baseline characteristics, the HR for OS was 0.54 (95% CI, 0.27–1.06; P = .074). For group 1 only (those with PSA relapse after curative therapy, N = 261), the estimated 5-year survival rate was 78.2% versus 84.3% with delayed-versus-immediate ADT (log-rank P = .10; fully adjusted HR, 0.59; 95% CI, 0.26–1.30, P = .19).Toxicity was greater in the immediate ADT study arm compared with delayed therapy.  Serious (grade 4) adverse events were reported in 42% of patients in the immediate ADT study arm versus 31% of patients in the delayed therapy arm.  Quality of life (QOL) fell by 6.1% (considered a small but clinically important drop) with immediate ADT versus 3% with delayed ADT (considered a trivial drop); but this was not a statistically significant difference (P = .14).[16] Sexual activity was lower and hormone-related symptoms (hot flashes and sore or enlarged nipples) were clinically and statistically significantly worse in the immediate ADT arm compared with the delayed therapy arm.[17] Of these 315 men, 103 men (34%) developed clinical evidence of recurrence. The median time to development of clinical metastasis after biochemical recurrence was 8 years. After the men developed metastatic disease, the median time to death was an additional 5 years. Two groups of men were randomly assigned to open-label, immediate-versus-delayed (at least 2-year delay) ADT:   Group 1 included men who had a PSA relapse after curative therapy (89% of the study population). Group 2 included asymptomatic men who were considered unsuitable for curative treatment because of age, comorbidity, or locally advanced disease (11% of the study population).Planned accrual was 750 patients, but because of  slow accrual, the trial closed at 293 patients. In groups 1 and 2 combined, with a median follow-up of 5 years, the 5-year OS rate was 86.4% in the delayed ADT study arm versus 91.2% in the immediate ADT study arm (log-rank P = .047).[16][Level of evidence A1]  After full adjustment for baseline characteristics, the HR for OS was 0.54 (95% CI, 0.27–1.06; P = .074). For group 1 only (those with PSA relapse after curative therapy, N = 261), the estimated 5-year survival rate was 78.2% versus 84.3% with delayed-versus-immediate ADT (log-rank P = .10; fully adjusted HR, 0.59; 95% CI, 0.26–1.30, P = .19). Toxicity was greater in the immediate ADT study arm compared with delayed therapy.  Serious (grade 4) adverse events were reported in 42% of patients in the immediate ADT study arm versus 31% of patients in the delayed therapy arm.  Quality of life (QOL) fell by 6.1% (considered a small but clinically important drop) with immediate ADT versus 3% with delayed ADT (considered a trivial drop); but this was not a statistically significant difference (P = .14).[16] Sexual activity was lower and hormone-related symptoms (hot flashes and sore or enlarged nipples) were clinically and statistically significantly worse in the immediate ADT arm compared with the delayed therapy arm.[17] Group 1 included men who had a PSA relapse after curative therapy (89% of the study population). Group 2 included asymptomatic men who were considered unsuitable for curative treatment because of age, comorbidity, or locally advanced disease (11% of the study population). Planned accrual was 750 patients, but because of  slow accrual, the trial closed at 293 patients. Most men who are treated for recurrence after initial local therapy are asymptomatic, and the recurrence is detected by a rising PSA.  It is possible that intermittent androgen deprivation (IAD) therapy can be used as an alternative to continuous ADT (CAD)  to improve QOL and decrease the amount of time during which the patient experiences the side effects of hormonal therapy, without decreasing the survival rate. This important clinical question was addressed in a noninferiority-designed, randomized, controlled trial with 1,386 men who had  rising PSA levels (>3 ng/mL, with serum testosterone >5 nmol/L) more than 1 year after primary or salvage radiation therapy for localized prostate cancer.[18][Levels of evidence A1 and A3]The ADT arm consisted of 8-month treatment cycles with an LH-RH agonist (combined with a nonsteroidal antiandrogen for at least the first 4 weeks) that was reinstituted if the PSA level exceeded 10 ng/mL.  The study was powered to detect (with 95% confidence) an 8% lower OS rate in the IAD group compared with the CAD group at 7 years.After a median follow-up of 6.9 years (maximum follow-up 11.2 years), OS in the two groups was nearly identical, and the study was stopped (median survival, 8.8 vs. 9.1 years; HRdeath, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.86–1.21). This fulfilled the prospective criterion of noninferiority.  In a retrospective analysis, prostate–cancer-specific mortality was also similar in the two arms (HR, 1.18; 95% CI, 0.90–1.55; P = 0.24). In addition, IAD was statistically significantly better than CAD in several QOL domains, such as hot flashes, desire for sexual activity, and urinary symptoms.  Patients on the IAD study arm received a median of 15.4 months of treatment versus 43.9 months on the CAD arm.The study does not address the unanswered question about whether the initiation of any ADT for an elevated PSA after initial local therapy extends survival compared with delay until clinically symptomatic progression.  Of note, 59% of all deaths were unrelated to prostate cancer, and only 14% of all patients died of prostate cancer. A systematic review of 15 randomized trials that compared CAD versus IAD therapy for patients with advanced or recurrent prostate cancer found no significant difference in OS, which was reported in eight of the trials (HR, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.93–1.11); prostate–cancer-specific survival, reported in five of the trials (HR, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.87–1.19); or progression-free survival (PFS), reported in four of the trials (HR, 0.94; 95% CI, 0.84–1.05).  The meta-analysis fulfilled prespecified criteria for noninferiority of OS (upper bound of 1.15 for the HR of 1.15).[19][Level of evidence A1] However, of the 15 trials, all but one had an unclear or high risk of bias according to prespecified criteria.	There was minimal difference in patient-reported QOL, but most trials found better physical and sexual functioning in patients in the IAD arms. The ADT arm consisted of 8-month treatment cycles with an LH-RH agonist (combined with a nonsteroidal antiandrogen for at least the first 4 weeks) that was reinstituted if the PSA level exceeded 10 ng/mL.  The study was powered to detect (with 95% confidence) an 8% lower OS rate in the IAD group compared with the CAD group at 7 years. After a median follow-up of 6.9 years (maximum follow-up 11.2 years), OS in the two groups was nearly identical, and the study was stopped (median survival, 8.8 vs. 9.1 years; HRdeath, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.86–1.21). This fulfilled the prospective criterion of noninferiority. In a retrospective analysis, prostate–cancer-specific mortality was also similar in the two arms (HR, 1.18; 95% CI, 0.90–1.55; P = 0.24). In addition, IAD was statistically significantly better than CAD in several QOL domains, such as hot flashes, desire for sexual activity, and urinary symptoms.  Patients on the IAD study arm received a median of 15.4 months of treatment versus 43.9 months on the CAD arm. The study does not address the unanswered question about whether the initiation of any ADT for an elevated PSA after initial local therapy extends survival compared with delay until clinically symptomatic progression.  Of note, 59% of all deaths were unrelated to prostate cancer, and only 14% of all patients died of prostate cancer. There was minimal difference in patient-reported QOL, but most trials found better physical and sexual functioning in patients in the IAD arms. A systematic evidence review compared nonsteroidal antiandrogen monotherapy with surgical or medical castration from 11 randomized trials in 3,060 men with locally advanced, metastatic, or recurrent disease after local therapy.[20]  The use of nonsteroidal antiandrogens as monotherapy decreased OS and increased the rate of clinical progression and treatment failure.[20][Level of evidence A1] As noted above, studies have shown that chemotherapy with docetaxel or cabazitaxel and immunotherapy with sipuleucel-T can prolong OS in patients with hormone-resistant metastatic prostate cancer. Nevertheless, hormonal therapy has also been shown to improve survival even in men who have progressed after other forms of hormonal therapy as well as chemotherapy. Some forms of hormonal therapy are effective in the management of metastatic hormone–refractory prostate cancer. Because there are no head-to-head comparisons, there are no trials to help decide which of these agents should be used first or in what sequence they should be used. Even among patients with metastatic hormone-refractory prostate cancer, some heterogeneity is found in prognosis and in retained hormone sensitivity. In such patients who have symptomatic bone disease, several factors are associated with worsened prognosis: poor performance status, elevated alkaline phosphatase, abnormal serum creatinine, and short (<1 year) previous response to hormonal therapy.[21] The absolute level of PSA at the initiation of therapy in relapsed or hormone-refractory patients has not shown prognostic significance.[22] Some patients whose disease has progressed on combined androgen blockade can respond to a variety of second-line hormonal therapies. Aminoglutethimide, hydrocortisone, flutamide withdrawal, progesterone, ketoconazole, and combinations of these therapies have produced PSA responses in 14% to 60% of patients treated and have also produced clinical responses of 0% to 25% when assessed. The duration of these PSA responses has ranged from 2 to 4 months.[23]  Survival rates are similar whether ketoconazole plus hydrocortisone is initiated at the same time as antiandrogen (e.g., flutamide, bicalutamide, or nilutamide) withdrawal or when PSA has risen after an initial trial of antiandrogen withdrawal, as seen in the CLB-9583 trial (NCT00002760), for example.[24][Level of evidence A1] There are conflicting data on whether PSA changes in men undergoing chemotherapy are predictive of survival.[22,25] Patients treated with either luteinizing-hormone agonists or estrogens as primary therapy are generally maintained with castrate levels of testosterone. One study from the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) showed that a superior survival resulted when patients were maintained on primary androgen deprivation;[9] however, another study from SWOG (formerly  the Southwest Oncology Group) did not show an advantage to continued androgen blockade.[26] Evidence (hormonal approaches for castration-resistant progressive disease with no previous chemotherapy): Abiraterone acetate is an inhibitor of androgen biosynthesis that works by blocking cytochrome P450c17 (CYP17).  Abiraterone has mineralocorticoid effects, producing an increased incidence of fluid retention and edema, hypokalemia, hypertension, and cardiac dysfunction.  In addition, abiraterone is associated with hepatotoxicity.[27] However, compared with other therapies, abiraterone toxicities are mild. In a double-blinded placebo-controlled trial, 1,088 men with progressing hormone refractory disease (serum testosterone <50 ng per deciliter on previous antiandrogen therapy), no previous chemotherapy, and ECOG performance status (PS) 0 to 1 were given prednisone (5 mg PO bid) plus either abiraterone acetate (1,000 mg PO qd) or placebo.[28,29][Level of evidence A1] The coprimary end points were radiological PFS and OS.  Four sequential analyses were planned.At the second interim analysis, after a median follow-up of 22.2 months, the study was stopped and unblinded because of aggregate efficacy and safety as assessed by the data monitoring committee.  At that point, the radiological PFS had reached the prespecified stopping boundary in favor of abiraterone (median PFS, 16.5 months vs. 8.3 months [HR,  0.53; 95% CI, 0.45–0.62; P < .001]).  At the fourth (and final) analysis with a median follow-up of 49.2 months (maximum 60 months), 65% had died in the abiraterone-acetate study arm  and 71% had died in the placebo study arm (HR, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.70–0.93: P = .033).  Median OS was 34.7 versus 30.3 months.[29][Level of evidence A1]Median time to health-related QOL  deterioration was long in the abiraterone study arm, as assessed by the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Prostate Version 4 (FACT-P)  total score (12.7 months vs. 8.3 months; HR, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.66-0.92; P = .003) and by the prostate–cancer-specific subscale (11.1 months vs. 5.8 months; HR, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.60–0.83; P < .0001).[30][Level of evidence A3] In addition, patients in the abiraterone study group had statistically significant longer median times to opiate use for pain, initiation of cytotoxic chemotherapy, decline in PS, and PSA progression.[28,30][Levels of evidence A3 and B1] Enzalutamide, an androgen receptor antagonist, has been shown to increase OS and QOL in men with metastatic prostate cancer that has progressed despite ADT. In the PREVAIL study (NCT01212991), 1,717 asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic men with recurrent metastatic prostate cancer despite ADT were randomly assigned to receive enzalutamide (160 mg PO qd) versus placebo.[31-33][Levels of evidence A1 and A3]After a median follow-up of 22 months, the study was stopped because of an OS benefit in the enzalutamide study arm (HR, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.6–0.84; P < .001).  The proportion of men who had died was 28% versus 35%, and the median OS was 32.4 versus 30.2 months.Median time until decline in global QOL, measured by the FACT-P score, was 11.3 months versus 5.6 months in the enzalutamide and placebo groups (P < .001), and delayed occurrence of first skeletal-related event requiring clinical intervention was also shown.[31,32][Levels of evidence A3 and B1]	Grade 3 or worse adverse events were more common in the enzalutamide group (43% vs. 37%), primarily because of  differences in hypertension, fatigue, and falls.   Because patients receiving enzalutamide were on assigned therapy for an average of 1 year longer than those on placebo, the duration of response was longer in patients receiving enzalutamide, and this difference may have contributed to the increase in adverse events. Enzalutamide has also been tested in the setting of clinically nonmetastatic, hormone-resistant prostate cancer (defined as PSA doubling time ≤10 months while undergoing hormonal therapy).[34]In the double-blind phase III PROSPER trial (NCT02003924), 1,401 men without clinical metastases on imaging, but with a rapidly rising PSA, were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive either enzalutamide (160 mg PO qd) or placebo.  After follow-up of up to 41 months, enzalutamide showed superiority in the primary end point, metastasis-free survival: 77% versus 51% (median 36.6 vs. 14.7 months; HR, 0.29; 95% CI, 0.24–0.35; P < .001).[34][Level of evidence B1]	OS data were not mature, but at the time of the report, 11% of the men had died in the enzalutamide arm versus 13%  in the  placebo arm.	The rate of decline in health-related quality of life was the same in both arms.	Grade 3+ toxicities were more common in the enzalutamide group: 31% versus 23%.  There were also excesses in several adverse events of special interest because they have been reported previously in patients treated with enzalutamide, including hypertension (12% vs. 5%), major cardiovascular events (5% vs. 3%), and mental impairment disorders (5% vs. 2%). Continuing enzalutamide in patients who were switched to abiraterone because of progression, and who had  castration-resistant metastatic prostate cancer and a rising PSA while receiving enzalutamide, did not appear to improve the rate of PFS or of clinical progression, a strategy that was tested in the randomized PLATO trial (NCT01995513).[35][Level of evidence B1] Apalutamide, an androgen receptor antagonist, has been tested in the setting of clinically nonmetastatic, castration-resistant prostate cancer (defined as PSA doubling time ≤10 months while undergoing androgen deprivation therapy).[36] In the trial,	1,207 men were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive either daily apalutamide (240 mg PO) or a placebo.  All  continued  their previous ADT.  With a median follow-up of 20.3 months, metastasis-free survival was 40.5 months in the apalutamide group compared with 16.2 months on placebo (HR, 0.28; 95% CI, 0.23–0.35; P < .001).[36][Level of evidence B1]There was a trend toward improved OS in the apalutamide group, but it did not reach statistical significance at the time of the report (HR, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.47–1.04; P = .07).	There were increases in a number of toxicities associated with apalutamide treatment, which included the following: bone fractures (11.7% vs. 6.5%), hypothyroidism (8.1% vs. 2.0%), fatigue (30.4% vs. 21.1%), hypertension (24.8% vs. 19.8%), rash (23.8% vs. 5.5%), diarrhea (20.3% vs. 15.1%), weight loss (16.1% vs. 6.3%), arthralgias (15.9% vs. 7.5%), and falls (15.6% vs. 9.0%).In a prespecified exploratory analysis, quality of life over time was similar in the apalutamide and placebo arms, as assessed overall and for all component subscale scores of the FACT-P and EuroQol five-dimension, three-level (EQ-5D-3L) questionnaires.[37][Level of evidence A3] Darolutamide, another androgen receptor antagonist, has also been shown to prolong metastasis-free survival and OS in men with nonmetastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer.[38,39] A distinguishing characteristic of darolutamide is its low penetration of the blood-brain barrier. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved darolutamide specifically for nonmetastatic, castration-resistant prostate cancer, a more limited label compared with enzalutamide and apalutamide.A randomized controlled trial included 1,509 men with nonmetastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer, a rising PSA, and a castrate testosterone level. Patients were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive darolutamide or placebo while continuing ADT.[38,39]The 3-year OS rate was 83% for patients who received darolutamide (95% CI, 80%–86%) and 77% for patients who received placebo (95% CI, 72%–81%).[38,39][Level of evidence A1]	The darolutamide arm was also associated with longer metastasis-free survival (HR, 0.41; 95% CI, 0.34–0.50).	Patient-reported QOL was similar in the two arms and differences favored the darolutamide arm. There were statistically significant differences favoring darolutamide for measures of pain, well-being, and urinary symptoms, but the differences did not reach clinically meaningful levels.	In contrast to studies of enzalutamide and apalutamide, darolutamide was not associated with a higher incidence of falls or fractures, hypertension, or central nervous system–related adverse effects when compared with placebo. At the second interim analysis, after a median follow-up of 22.2 months, the study was stopped and unblinded because of aggregate efficacy and safety as assessed by the data monitoring committee.  At that point, the radiological PFS had reached the prespecified stopping boundary in favor of abiraterone (median PFS, 16.5 months vs. 8.3 months [HR,  0.53; 95% CI, 0.45–0.62; P < .001]). At the fourth (and final) analysis with a median follow-up of 49.2 months (maximum 60 months), 65% had died in the abiraterone-acetate study arm  and 71% had died in the placebo study arm (HR, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.70–0.93: P = .033).  Median OS was 34.7 versus 30.3 months.[29][Level of evidence A1] Median time to health-related QOL  deterioration was long in the abiraterone study arm, as assessed by the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Prostate Version 4 (FACT-P)  total score (12.7 months vs. 8.3 months; HR, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.66-0.92; P = .003) and by the prostate–cancer-specific subscale (11.1 months vs. 5.8 months; HR, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.60–0.83; P < .0001).[30][Level of evidence A3] In addition, patients in the abiraterone study group had statistically significant longer median times to opiate use for pain, initiation of cytotoxic chemotherapy, decline in PS, and PSA progression.[28,30][Levels of evidence A3 and B1] After a median follow-up of 22 months, the study was stopped because of an OS benefit in the enzalutamide study arm (HR, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.6–0.84; P < .001).  The proportion of men who had died was 28% versus 35%, and the median OS was 32.4 versus 30.2 months. Median time until decline in global QOL, measured by the FACT-P score, was 11.3 months versus 5.6 months in the enzalutamide and placebo groups (P < .001), and delayed occurrence of first skeletal-related event requiring clinical intervention was also shown.[31,32][Levels of evidence A3 and B1] Grade 3 or worse adverse events were more common in the enzalutamide group (43% vs. 37%), primarily because of  differences in hypertension, fatigue, and falls.   Because patients receiving enzalutamide were on assigned therapy for an average of 1 year longer than those on placebo, the duration of response was longer in patients receiving enzalutamide, and this difference may have contributed to the increase in adverse events. In the double-blind phase III PROSPER trial (NCT02003924), 1,401 men without clinical metastases on imaging, but with a rapidly rising PSA, were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive either enzalutamide (160 mg PO qd) or placebo.  After follow-up of up to 41 months, enzalutamide showed superiority in the primary end point, metastasis-free survival: 77% versus 51% (median 36.6 vs. 14.7 months; HR, 0.29; 95% CI, 0.24–0.35; P < .001).[34][Level of evidence B1] OS data were not mature, but at the time of the report, 11% of the men had died in the enzalutamide arm versus 13%  in the  placebo arm. The rate of decline in health-related quality of life was the same in both arms. Grade 3+ toxicities were more common in the enzalutamide group: 31% versus 23%. There were also excesses in several adverse events of special interest because they have been reported previously in patients treated with enzalutamide, including hypertension (12% vs. 5%), major cardiovascular events (5% vs. 3%), and mental impairment disorders (5% vs. 2%). With a median follow-up of 20.3 months, metastasis-free survival was 40.5 months in the apalutamide group compared with 16.2 months on placebo (HR, 0.28; 95% CI, 0.23–0.35; P < .001).[36][Level of evidence B1] There was a trend toward improved OS in the apalutamide group, but it did not reach statistical significance at the time of the report (HR, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.47–1.04; P = .07). There were increases in a number of toxicities associated with apalutamide treatment, which included the following: bone fractures (11.7% vs. 6.5%), hypothyroidism (8.1% vs. 2.0%), fatigue (30.4% vs. 21.1%), hypertension (24.8% vs. 19.8%), rash (23.8% vs. 5.5%), diarrhea (20.3% vs. 15.1%), weight loss (16.1% vs. 6.3%), arthralgias (15.9% vs. 7.5%), and falls (15.6% vs. 9.0%). In a prespecified exploratory analysis, quality of life over time was similar in the apalutamide and placebo arms, as assessed overall and for all component subscale scores of the FACT-P and EuroQol five-dimension, three-level (EQ-5D-3L) questionnaires.[37][Level of evidence A3] A randomized controlled trial included 1,509 men with nonmetastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer, a rising PSA, and a castrate testosterone level. Patients were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive darolutamide or placebo while continuing ADT.[38,39] The 3-year OS rate was 83% for patients who received darolutamide (95% CI, 80%–86%) and 77% for patients who received placebo (95% CI, 72%–81%).[38,39][Level of evidence A1] The darolutamide arm was also associated with longer metastasis-free survival (HR, 0.41; 95% CI, 0.34–0.50). Patient-reported QOL was similar in the two arms and differences favored the darolutamide arm. There were statistically significant differences favoring darolutamide for measures of pain, well-being, and urinary symptoms, but the differences did not reach clinically meaningful levels. In contrast to studies of enzalutamide and apalutamide, darolutamide was not associated with a higher incidence of falls or fractures, hypertension, or central nervous system–related adverse effects when compared with placebo. Evidence (hormonal approaches for progressive disease with previous chemotherapy): Men with metastatic prostate cancer who had biochemical or clinical progression after treatment with docetaxel (N = 1,195) were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive either abiraterone acetate (1,000 mg) (n = 797) or placebo (n = 398) by mouth every day (COU-AA-301 [NCT00638690]). Both groups received prednisone (5 mg PO bid).[40][Level of evidence A1]After a median follow-up of 12.8 months, the trial was stopped when an interim analysis showed an OS advantage in the abiraterone group. The final report of the trial was published after a median follow-up of 20.2 months.Median OS was 15.8 months in the abiraterone group versus 11.2 months in the placebo group (HRdeath,  0.74; 95% CI, 0.64–0.86; P < .0001).Compared with placebo, abiraterone was also associated with a delay in median time to deterioration in the FACT-P QOL score (59.9 weeks vs. 36.1 weeks, P < .0001) and a clinically important improvement in QOL in men with functional status impairment at baseline (48% vs. 32%, P < .0001).[41][Level of evidence A3] Enzalutamide has also been shown to increase survival in patients with progressive prostate cancer who previously received  ADT as well as docetaxel. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 1,129 men were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive enzalutamide (160 mg PO qd) versus placebo.[42-45][Levels of evidence A1 and   A3]After a median follow-up of 14.4 months, the study was stopped at the single-planned interim analysis because improved OS, the primary end point, was found in the enzalutamide study group (median OS, 18.4 months; 95% CI, 17.3–not-yet-reached vs. 13.6 months; 95% CI, 11.3–15.8; HRdeath, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.53–0.75; P < .001).  In addition, QOL, measured by the FACT-P questionnaire, was superior in the enzalutamide arm, as was time to first skeletal-related event.[43,45]A seizure was reported in 5 of the 800 men in the enzalutamide study group versus none in the placebo group; however, the relationship to enzalutamide is not clear. Of the reported seizures, two patients had brain metastases, one patient had just received intravenous (IV) lidocaine, and one seizure was not witnessed. After a median follow-up of 12.8 months, the trial was stopped when an interim analysis showed an OS advantage in the abiraterone group. The final report of the trial was published after a median follow-up of 20.2 months. Median OS was 15.8 months in the abiraterone group versus 11.2 months in the placebo group (HRdeath,  0.74; 95% CI, 0.64–0.86; P < .0001). Compared with placebo, abiraterone was also associated with a delay in median time to deterioration in the FACT-P QOL score (59.9 weeks vs. 36.1 weeks, P < .0001) and a clinically important improvement in QOL in men with functional status impairment at baseline (48% vs. 32%, P < .0001).[41][Level of evidence A3] After a median follow-up of 14.4 months, the study was stopped at the single-planned interim analysis because improved OS, the primary end point, was found in the enzalutamide study group (median OS, 18.4 months; 95% CI, 17.3–not-yet-reached vs. 13.6 months; 95% CI, 11.3–15.8; HRdeath, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.53–0.75; P < .001).  In addition, QOL, measured by the FACT-P questionnaire, was superior in the enzalutamide arm, as was time to first skeletal-related event.[43,45] A seizure was reported in 5 of the 800 men in the enzalutamide study group versus none in the placebo group; however, the relationship to enzalutamide is not clear. Of the reported seizures, two patients had brain metastases, one patient had just received intravenous (IV) lidocaine, and one seizure was not witnessed. Painful bone metastases can be a major problem for patients with prostate cancer.  Many
strategies have been studied for palliation, including the following:[46-50] External-beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Bone-seeking radionuclides (strontium chloride Sr 89 [89Sr]). Denosumab (a monoclonal antibody that inhibits osteoclast function). Pain medication. Corticosteroids. Bisphosphonates. For more information, see Cancer Pain. Evidence (palliation for bone metastases using radiation therapy): EBRT for palliation of bone
pain can be very useful.  A single fraction of 8 Gy has been shown to have similar benefits on bone pain relief and QOL as multiple fractions (3 Gy × 10) was seen in the RTOG-9714 trial (NCT00003162), for example.[51,52][Level of evidence A3] Evidence (palliation for bone metastases using strontium chloride): The use of radioisotopes such as 89Sr has been effective as palliative treatment of some patients with osteoblastic metastases. As a single agent, 89Sr has been reported to decrease bone pain in 80% of patients treated.[53] A multicenter randomized trial of a single IV dose of 89Sr (150 MBq: 4 mCi) versus palliative EBRT was done in men with painful bone metastases from prostate cancer despite hormone treatment.[54][Level of evidence A1]; [55]Similar subjective pain response rates were shown in both groups: 34.7% for 89Sr versus 33.3% for EBRT alone. OS was better in the EBRT group than in the 89Sr group (P = .046; median survival, 11.0 months vs. 7.2 months). No statistically significant differences in time to subjective progression or in PFS were seen.When used as an adjunct to EBRT, 89Sr was shown to slow disease progression and to reduce analgesic requirements, compared with EBRT alone. Similar subjective pain response rates were shown in both groups: 34.7% for 89Sr versus 33.3% for EBRT alone. OS was better in the EBRT group than in the 89Sr group (P = .046; median survival, 11.0 months vs. 7.2 months). No statistically significant differences in time to subjective progression or in PFS were seen. When used as an adjunct to EBRT, 89Sr was shown to slow disease progression and to reduce analgesic requirements, compared with EBRT alone. Evidence (palliation or prevention of bone metastases using denosumab): A placebo-controlled randomized trial (NCT00321620) compared denosumab with zoledronic acid for the prevention of skeletal events (pathological fractures, spinal cord compression, or the need for palliative bone radiation or surgery) in men with hormonal therapy-resistant prostate cancer with at least one bone metastasis.[46] The trial reported that denosumab was more effective than zoledronic acid; median time to first on-study skeletal event was 20.7 versus 17.1 months (HR, 0.82; 95% CI, 0.71–0.95).Serious adverse events were reported in 63% of denosumab patients versus 60% in patients on zoledronic acid. The cumulative incidence of osteonecrosis of the jaw was low in both study arms (2% in the denosumab arm vs.  1% in the zoledronic acid arm). There was grade 3 to 4 toxicity. There was no difference in survival. The incidence of hypocalcemia was higher in the denosumab arm (13% vs. 6%).[56] A randomized placebo-controlled trial included 1,432 men with castration-resistant prostate cancer with no evidence of any metastases who were given denosumab (120 mg administered subcutaneously   every 4 weeks) to prevent the first evidence of bone metastasis (whether symptomatic or not).[56][Level of evidence B1]After a median follow-up of 20 months, median bone metastasis-free survival was 29.5 versus 25.2 months in the denosumab versus placebo arms (HR, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.73–0.98; P = .028). Symptomatic bone metastases were reported in 69 (10%) denosumab patients versus 96 (13%) placebo patients (HR, 0.67; 95% CI, 0.49–0.92; P = .01).There were no differences in OS between the two groups.Osteonecrosis occurred in 33 (5%) of men on the denosumab arm versus none on the placebo arm.  Hypocalcemia occurred in 12 (2%) versus 2 (<1%) men, and urinary retention in 54 (8%) of men on denosumab versus 31 (4%) of men on placebo. The trial reported that denosumab was more effective than zoledronic acid; median time to first on-study skeletal event was 20.7 versus 17.1 months (HR, 0.82; 95% CI, 0.71–0.95). Serious adverse events were reported in 63% of denosumab patients versus 60% in patients on zoledronic acid. The cumulative incidence of osteonecrosis of the jaw was low in both study arms (2% in the denosumab arm vs.  1% in the zoledronic acid arm). There was grade 3 to 4 toxicity. There was no difference in survival. The incidence of hypocalcemia was higher in the denosumab arm (13% vs. 6%).[56] After a median follow-up of 20 months, median bone metastasis-free survival was 29.5 versus 25.2 months in the denosumab versus placebo arms (HR, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.73–0.98; P = .028). Symptomatic bone metastases were reported in 69 (10%) denosumab patients versus 96 (13%) placebo patients (HR, 0.67; 95% CI, 0.49–0.92; P = .01). There were no differences in OS between the two groups. Osteonecrosis occurred in 33 (5%) of men on the denosumab arm versus none on the placebo arm.  Hypocalcemia occurred in 12 (2%) versus 2 (<1%) men, and urinary retention in 54 (8%) of men on denosumab versus 31 (4%) of men on placebo. Treatment options for patients with recurrent prostate cancer include the following: Hormone therapy. Chemotherapy for hormone-resistant  prostate cancer. Immunotherapy. Radiopharmaceutical therapy. Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors for men with prostate cancer and BRCA1, BRCA2, and/or ATM mutations. Evidence (chemotherapy for hormone-resistant prostate cancer): A randomized trial showed improved pain control in patients with hormone-resistant prostate cancer treated with mitoxantrone plus prednisone compared with those treated with prednisone alone.[57] Differences in OS or measured global QOL between the two treatments were not statistically significant. Docetaxel has been shown to improve OS compared with mitoxantrone.	In a randomized trial involving patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer, docetaxel (75 mg/m2 every 3 weeks) and docetaxel (30 mg/m2 weekly for 5 out of every 6 weeks) were compared with mitoxantrone (12 mg/m2 every 3 weeks). All patients received oral prednisone (5 mg bid). Patients in the docetaxel arms also received high-dose dexamethasone pretreatment for each docetaxel administration (8 mg given at 12 hours, 3 hours, and 1 hour before the 3-week regimen; 8 mg given at 1 hour before the 5 out-of-every-6 weeks' regimen).[58] OS at 3 years was statistically significantly better in the 3-weekly docetaxel arm (18.6%) than in the mitoxantrone arm (13.5%, HRdeath, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.67–0.93). However, the OS rate for the 5 out-of-every-6 weeks docetaxel regimen was 16.8%, which was not statistically significantly better than mitoxantrone. QOL was also superior in the docetaxel arms compared with mitoxantrone (P = .009).[59][Levels of evidence A1 and A3] In another randomized trial involving patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer, a 3-week regimen of estramustine (280 mg PO tid for days 1 to 5, plus daily warfarin and 325 mg aspirin to prevent vascular thrombosis), and docetaxel (60 mg/m2 IV on day 2, preceded by dexamethasone [20 mg × 3 starting the night before]) was compared with mitoxantrone (12 mg/m2 IV every 3 weeks) plus prednisone (5 mg qd).[60][Level of evidence A1]After a median follow-up of 32 months, median OS was 17.5 months in the estramustine/docetaxel arm versus 15.6 months in the mitoxantrone arm (HRdeath, 0.80; 95% CI, 0.67–0.97; P = .02).	Global QOL and pain palliation measures were similar in the two treatment arms.[61][Level of evidence A3] A 2-weekly regimen of docetaxel has been compared with a 3-weekly regimen.  OS appeared to be better in the 2-week regimen, and hematologic toxicity was less.[62][Level of evidence A1]In the trial, 361 men with metastatic hormone-resistant prostate cancer were randomly assigned to receive docetaxel either in a 2-weekly regimen (50 mg/m2 IV) or a 3-weekly regimen (75 mg/m2 IV) until progression.  All patients were also to receive prednisolone (10 mg PO qd) and dexamethasone (7.5–8.0 mg qd), starting the day before and continuing for 1 to 2 days after each docetaxel dose.  Fifteen randomly assigned patients (4.2%) were deemed ineligible in retrospect or withdrew consent, and they were dropped from the analysis.With a median follow-up of 18 months, there was a small difference in time to treatment failure, the primary end point of the study (5.6 months [95% CI, 5.0–6.2] vs. 4.9 months [95% CI, 4.5–5.4];    P = .014).  However, there was a larger difference in median OS, a secondary end point, in favor of the 2-week regimen (19.5 months [95% CI, 15.9–23.1] vs. 17.0 months [95% CI, 15.0 –19.1]; P = .02).  There was a lower rate of grade 3 to 4 neutropenia with the 2-week regimen (36% vs. 53%; P < .0001) and a lower rate of febrile neutropenia (4% vs. 14%; P = .001). In patients with metastatic hormone/castrate-refractory prostate cancer (mCRPC) and no previous chemotherapy, cabazitaxel and docetaxel appeared to provide similar results with respect to OS.[63]	In the FIRSTANA trial (NCT01308567), 1,168 men with mCRPC were randomly assigned (1:1:1 ratio) to receive cabazitaxel 20 mg/m2, cabazitaxel 25 mg/m2, or docetaxel 75 mg/m2 IV every 3 weeks (plus prednisone 10 mg PO qd) until disease progression.  Median OS was similar across all three study arms and not statistically significantly different (24.5 vs. 25.2 vs. 24.3 months, respectively), with virtually overlapping survival curves.[63][Level of evidence A1]	However, toxicities varied across the study arms, with adverse event rates of 41.2%, 60.1%, and 46.0%, respectively, which required urgent treatment. In patients with  mCRPC whose disease progressed during or after treatment with docetaxel, cabazitaxel was shown to improve survival compared with mitoxantrone in a randomized trial (NCT00417079).[64] In this trial, 755 such men were treated with  prednisone (10 mg PO qd) and randomly assigned to receive either cabazitaxel (25 mg/m2 IV) or mitoxantrone (12 mg/m2 IV) every 3 weeks.[64][Level of evidence A1]Median OS was 15.1 months  in the cabazitaxel arm and 12.7 months in the mitoxantrone study arm (HRdeath, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.59–0.83; P < .0001). In a noninferiority-design randomized trial comparing cabazitaxel (20 mg/m2 IV every 3 weeks) with cabazitaxel (25 mg/m2 IV every 3 weeks) in a similar population of 1,200 men with mCRPC who had received previous docetaxel, the lower dose of cabazitaxel fulfilled noninferiority criteria with respect to OS (HRdeath, 1.024; CI, upper bound at 1.184), but with less toxicity.[65][Level of evidence A1] OS at 3 years was statistically significantly better in the 3-weekly docetaxel arm (18.6%) than in the mitoxantrone arm (13.5%, HRdeath, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.67–0.93). However, the OS rate for the 5 out-of-every-6 weeks docetaxel regimen was 16.8%, which was not statistically significantly better than mitoxantrone. QOL was also superior in the docetaxel arms compared with mitoxantrone (P = .009).[59][Levels of evidence A1 and A3] After a median follow-up of 32 months, median OS was 17.5 months in the estramustine/docetaxel arm versus 15.6 months in the mitoxantrone arm (HRdeath, 0.80; 95% CI, 0.67–0.97; P = .02). Global QOL and pain palliation measures were similar in the two treatment arms.[61][Level of evidence A3] In the trial, 361 men with metastatic hormone-resistant prostate cancer were randomly assigned to receive docetaxel either in a 2-weekly regimen (50 mg/m2 IV) or a 3-weekly regimen (75 mg/m2 IV) until progression.  All patients were also to receive prednisolone (10 mg PO qd) and dexamethasone (7.5–8.0 mg qd), starting the day before and continuing for 1 to 2 days after each docetaxel dose.  Fifteen randomly assigned patients (4.2%) were deemed ineligible in retrospect or withdrew consent, and they were dropped from the analysis. With a median follow-up of 18 months, there was a small difference in time to treatment failure, the primary end point of the study (5.6 months [95% CI, 5.0–6.2] vs. 4.9 months [95% CI, 4.5–5.4];    P = .014).  However, there was a larger difference in median OS, a secondary end point, in favor of the 2-week regimen (19.5 months [95% CI, 15.9–23.1] vs. 17.0 months [95% CI, 15.0 –19.1]; P = .02). There was a lower rate of grade 3 to 4 neutropenia with the 2-week regimen (36% vs. 53%; P < .0001) and a lower rate of febrile neutropenia (4% vs. 14%; P = .001). In the FIRSTANA trial (NCT01308567), 1,168 men with mCRPC were randomly assigned (1:1:1 ratio) to receive cabazitaxel 20 mg/m2, cabazitaxel 25 mg/m2, or docetaxel 75 mg/m2 IV every 3 weeks (plus prednisone 10 mg PO qd) until disease progression.  Median OS was similar across all three study arms and not statistically significantly different (24.5 vs. 25.2 vs. 24.3 months, respectively), with virtually overlapping survival curves.[63][Level of evidence A1] However, toxicities varied across the study arms, with adverse event rates of 41.2%, 60.1%, and 46.0%, respectively, which required urgent treatment. Median OS was 15.1 months  in the cabazitaxel arm and 12.7 months in the mitoxantrone study arm (HRdeath, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.59–0.83; P < .0001). Other chemotherapy regimens reported to produce subjective improvement in symptoms and reduction in PSA level include the following:[66][Level of evidence C2]; [67] Paclitaxel. Estramustine/etoposide. Estramustine/vinblastine. Estramustine/paclitaxel. A study suggests that patients whose tumors exhibit neuroendocrine differentiation are more responsive to chemotherapy.[68] Sipuleucel-T, an active cellular immunotherapy, has been shown to increase OS in patients with hormone-refractory metastatic prostate cancer. Sipuleucel-T consists of autologous peripheral blood mononuclear cells that have been exposed ex vivo to a recombinant fusion protein (PA2024) composed of prostatic acid phosphatase fused to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. Side effects are generally consistent with cytokine release and include chills, fever, headache, myalgia, sweating, and influenza-like symptoms, usually within the first 24 hours of infusion.  No increase in autoimmune disorders or secondary malignancies has been noted.[69] Evidence (immunotherapy): In the largest trial (Immunotherapy for Prostate Adenocarcinoma Treatment: IMPACT trial [NCT00065442]), 512 patients with hormone-refractory metastatic disease were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive sipuleucel-T (n = 341) versus placebo (n = 171)  by IV in a 60-minute infusion every 2 weeks for a total of 3 doses.[70] Patients with visceral metastases, pathological bone fractures, or ECOG performance status worse than 0–1 were excluded from the study. At documented disease progression, patients in the placebo group could receive, at the physician’s discretion, infusions manufactured with the same specifications as sipuleucel-T but using cells that had been cryopreserved at the time that the placebo was prepared (63.7% of the placebo patients received these transfusions). Time to disease progression and time to development of disease-related pain were the initial primary end points, but the primary end point was changed before unblinding based upon survival differences in two previous trials of similar design (described below).[70][Level of evidence A1] 	After a median follow-up of 34.1 months, the overall mortality was 61.6% in the sipuleucel-T group versus 70.8% in the placebo group (HRdeath,  0.78; 95% CI, 0.61–0.98; P = .03). However, the improved survival was not accompanied by measurable antitumor effects. There was no difference between the study groups in rate of disease progression. In 2011, the estimated price of sipuleucel-T was $93,000 for a 1-month course of therapy. This translates into an estimated cost of about $276,000 per year-of-life saved.[71] The same investigators previously performed two  smaller trials (D9901 and D9902A [NCT00005947]) of nearly identical design to the IMPACT trial.[72,73]The combined results of the two smaller trials, involving  a total of 225 patients randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio of sipuleucel-T to placebo were like those in the IMPACT trial. The HRdeath was 0.67 (95% CI, 0.49–0.91), but the time-to-progression rates were not statistically significantly different. After a median follow-up of 34.1 months, the overall mortality was 61.6% in the sipuleucel-T group versus 70.8% in the placebo group (HRdeath,  0.78; 95% CI, 0.61–0.98; P = .03). However, the improved survival was not accompanied by measurable antitumor effects. There was no difference between the study groups in rate of disease progression. In 2011, the estimated price of sipuleucel-T was $93,000 for a 1-month course of therapy. This translates into an estimated cost of about $276,000 per year-of-life saved.[71] The combined results of the two smaller trials, involving  a total of 225 patients randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio of sipuleucel-T to placebo were like those in the IMPACT trial. The HRdeath was 0.67 (95% CI, 0.49–0.91), but the time-to-progression rates were not statistically significantly different. Low-dose prednisone may palliate symptoms in some patients.[74] Evidence (low-dose prednisone for palliation): A randomized comparison of prednisone (5 mg qid) with flutamide (250 mg tid) was conducted in patients with disease progression after androgen ablative therapy (castration or LH-RH agonist).[75] 	Prednisone and flutamide produced similar OS, symptomatic response, PSA response, and time to progression; however, there were statistically significant differences in pain, nausea and vomiting, and diarrhea in patients who received prednisone. For more information, see Cancer Pain, Nausea and Vomiting Related to Cancer Treatment, and Gastrointestinal Complications. Prednisone and flutamide produced similar OS, symptomatic response, PSA response, and time to progression; however, there were statistically significant differences in pain, nausea and vomiting, and diarrhea in patients who received prednisone. For more information, see Cancer Pain, Nausea and Vomiting Related to Cancer Treatment, and Gastrointestinal Complications. Ongoing clinical trials continue to explore the value of chemotherapy for these patients.[10-13,57,66-68] Radium Ra 223 (223Ra) emits alpha particles (i.e., two protons and two neutrons bound together, identical to a helium nucleus) with a half-life of 11.4 days.  It is administered by IV and selectively taken up by newly formed bone stroma.  The high-energy alpha particles have a short range of <100 mcM.  223Ra improved OS in patients with prostate cancer metastatic to the bone. Evidence (alpha emitter radiation): In a placebo-controlled trial, 921 men with symptomatic castration-resistant prostate cancer,  two or more bone metastases, and no known visceral metastases, were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive 223Ra at a dose of 50kBq per kg body weight every 4 weeks for six injections versus placebo.  All study participants had already received docetaxel, were not healthy enough to receive it, or declined it.[76,77]	Median OS was 14.9 months in the 223Ra study group versus 11.3 months in the placebo groups (HRmortality, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.58–0.83; P < .001).[76][Level of evidence A1]  	The rates of symptomatic skeletal events (33% vs. 38%) and spinal cord compression (4% vs. 7%) were also statistically significantly improved. Prospectively measured, QOL  was also better in the 223Ra study group (25% vs. 16% had a ≥10 point improvement on a scale of 0 to 156; P = .02).[76][Level of evidence A3]	With administration of 223Ra at a dose of 50kBq per kg of body weight every 4 weeks for 6 injections, the side effects were like those of a placebo. Median OS was 14.9 months in the 223Ra study group versus 11.3 months in the placebo groups (HRmortality, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.58–0.83; P < .001).[76][Level of evidence A1] The rates of symptomatic skeletal events (33% vs. 38%) and spinal cord compression (4% vs. 7%) were also statistically significantly improved. Prospectively measured, QOL  was also better in the 223Ra study group (25% vs. 16% had a ≥10 point improvement on a scale of 0 to 156; P = .02).[76][Level of evidence A3] With administration of 223Ra at a dose of 50kBq per kg of body weight every 4 weeks for 6 injections, the side effects were like those of a placebo. Evidence (olaparib): The PARP inhibitor olaparib was tested in an open-label, phase III, randomized controlled trial in men with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer and mutations in one of 15 prespecified genes related to homologous recombination repair, including BRCA1 or BRCA2. The men had previously received enzalutamide, abiraterone, or both, with or without previous taxane chemotherapy.[78] The trial enrolled 387 men and randomly assigned them in a 2:1 ratio to receive olaparib (300 mg twice daily) or physician's choice of enzalutamide or abiraterone plus prednisone. Cohort A included 245 patients with at least one mutation in BRCA1, BRCA2, or ATM. Cohort B included 142 patients with at least one mutation in one of the other 12 prespecified genes. 	The median OS in cohort A was 19.1 months for patients who received olaparib and 14.7 months for patients who received the control regimen (HR, 0.69; 95% CI, 0.50–0.97). A sensitivity analysis adjusting for crossover to olaparib in the control arm reported an HR of 0.42 (95% CI, 0.19–0.91).	There was no significant OS benefit in cohort B.	There was no significant OS benefit in the overall population.	The most common adverse events for patients who received olaparib were anemia (50%), nausea (43%), and fatigue or asthenia (42%). Cohort A included 245 patients with at least one mutation in BRCA1, BRCA2, or ATM. Cohort B included 142 patients with at least one mutation in one of the other 12 prespecified genes. The median OS in cohort A was 19.1 months for patients who received olaparib and 14.7 months for patients who received the control regimen (HR, 0.69; 95% CI, 0.50–0.97). A sensitivity analysis adjusting for crossover to olaparib in the control arm reported an HR of 0.42 (95% CI, 0.19–0.91). There was no significant OS benefit in cohort B. There was no significant OS benefit in the overall population. The most common adverse events for patients who received olaparib were anemia (50%), nausea (43%), and fatigue or asthenia (42%). Use our advanced clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now enrolling patients. The search can be narrowed by location of the trial, type of treatment, name of the drug, and other criteria. General information about clinical trials is also available. Trock BJ, Han M, Freedland SJ, et al.: Prostate cancer-specific survival following salvage radiotherapy vs observation in men with biochemical recurrence after radical prostatectomy. JAMA 299 (23): 2760-9, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Ray GR, Bagshaw MA, Freiha F: External beam radiation salvage for residual or recurrent local tumor following radical prostatectomy. J Urol 132 (5): 926-30, 1984. [PUBMED Abstract] Carter GE, Lieskovsky G, Skinner DG, et al.: Results of local and/or systemic adjuvant therapy in the management of pathological stage C or D1 prostate cancer following radical prostatectomy. J Urol 142 (5): 1266-70; discussion 1270-1, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Freeman JA, Lieskovsky G, Cook DW, et al.: Radical retropubic prostatectomy and postoperative adjuvant radiation for pathological stage C (PcN0) prostate cancer from 1976 to 1989: intermediate findings. J Urol 149 (5): 1029-34, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Shipley WU, Seiferheld W, Lukka HR, et al.: Radiation with or without Antiandrogen Therapy in Recurrent Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 376 (5): 417-428, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Moul JW, Paulson DF: The role of radical surgery in the management of radiation recurrent and large volume prostate cancer. Cancer 68 (6): 1265-71, 1991. [PUBMED Abstract] Schellhammer PF, Kuban DA, el-Mahdi AM: Treatment of clinical local failure after radiation therapy for prostate carcinoma. J Urol 150 (6): 1851-5, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Bales GT, Williams MJ, Sinner M, et al.: Short-term outcomes after cryosurgical ablation of the prostate in men with recurrent prostate carcinoma following radiation therapy. Urology 46 (5): 676-80, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Taylor CD, Elson P, Trump DL: Importance of continued testicular suppression in hormone-refractory prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 11 (11): 2167-72, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Debruyne FJ, Murray R, Fradet Y, et al.: Liarozole--a novel treatment approach for advanced prostate cancer: results of a large randomized trial versus cyproterone acetate. Liarozole Study Group. Urology 52 (1): 72-81, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Eisenberger MA: Chemotherapy for prostate carcinoma. NCI Monogr  (7): 151-63, 1988. [PUBMED Abstract] Pienta KJ, Redman B, Hussain M, et al.: Phase II evaluation of oral estramustine and oral etoposide in hormone-refractory adenocarcinoma of the prostate. J Clin Oncol 12 (10): 2005-12, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Hudes GR, Greenberg R, Krigel RL, et al.: Phase II study of estramustine and vinblastine, two microtubule inhibitors, in hormone-refractory prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 10 (11): 1754-61, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Kuban DA, el-Mahdi AM, Schellhammer PF: Prostate-specific antigen for pretreatment prediction and posttreatment evaluation of outcome after definitive irradiation for prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 32 (2): 307-16, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Sandler HM, Dunn RL, McLaughlin PW, et al.: Overall survival after prostate-specific-antigen-detected recurrence following conformal radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 48 (3): 629-33, 2000. [PUBMED Abstract] Duchesne GM, Woo HH, Bassett JK, et al.: Timing of androgen-deprivation therapy in patients with prostate cancer with a rising PSA (TROG 03.06 and VCOG PR 01-03 [TOAD]): a randomised, multicentre, non-blinded, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 17 (6): 727-37, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Duchesne GM, Woo HH, King M, et al.: Health-related quality of life for immediate versus delayed androgen-deprivation therapy in patients with asymptomatic, non-curable prostate cancer (TROG 03.06 and VCOG PR 01-03 [TOAD]): a randomised, multicentre, non-blinded, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 18 (9): 1192-1201, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Crook JM, O'Callaghan CJ, Duncan G, et al.: Intermittent androgen suppression for rising PSA level after radiotherapy. N Engl J Med 367 (10): 895-903, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Magnan S, Zarychanski R, Pilote L, et al.: Intermittent vs Continuous Androgen Deprivation Therapy for Prostate Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA Oncol 1 (9): 1261-9, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Kunath F, Grobe HR, Rücker G, et al.: Non-steroidal antiandrogen monotherapy compared with luteinising hormone-releasing hormone agonists or surgical castration monotherapy for advanced prostate cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev  (6): CD009266, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Fosså SD, Dearnaley DP, Law M, et al.: Prognostic factors in hormone-resistant progressing cancer of the prostate. Ann Oncol 3 (5): 361-6, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Kelly WK, Scher HI, Mazumdar M, et al.: Prostate-specific antigen as a measure of disease outcome in metastatic hormone-refractory prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 11 (4): 607-15, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Small EJ, Vogelzang NJ: Second-line hormonal therapy for advanced prostate cancer: a shifting paradigm. J Clin Oncol 15 (1): 382-8, 1997. [PUBMED Abstract] Small EJ, Halabi S, Dawson NA, et al.: Antiandrogen withdrawal alone or in combination with ketoconazole in androgen-independent prostate cancer patients: a phase III trial (CALGB 9583). J Clin Oncol 22 (6): 1025-33, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Sridhara R, Eisenberger MA, Sinibaldi VJ, et al.: Evaluation of prostate-specific antigen as a surrogate marker for response of hormone-refractory prostate cancer to suramin therapy. J Clin Oncol 13 (12): 2944-53, 1995. [PUBMED Abstract] Hussain M, Wolf M, Marshall E, et al.: Effects of continued androgen-deprivation therapy and other prognostic factors on response and survival in phase II chemotherapy trials for hormone-refractory prostate cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group report. J Clin Oncol 12 (9): 1868-75, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Sternberg CN, Castellano D, Daugaard G, et al.: Abiraterone acetate for patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer progressing after chemotherapy: final analysis of a multicentre, open-label, early-access protocol trial. Lancet Oncol 15 (11): 1263-8, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Ryan CJ, Smith MR, de Bono JS, et al.: Abiraterone in metastatic prostate cancer without previous chemotherapy. N Engl J Med 368 (2): 138-48, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Ryan CJ, Smith MR, Fizazi K, et al.: Abiraterone acetate plus prednisone versus placebo plus prednisone in chemotherapy-naive men with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (COU-AA-302): final overall survival analysis of a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 study. Lancet Oncol 16 (2): 152-60, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Basch E, Autio K, Ryan CJ, et al.: Abiraterone acetate plus prednisone versus prednisone alone in chemotherapy-naive men with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer: patient-reported outcome results of a randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 14 (12): 1193-9, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Beer TM, Armstrong AJ, Rathkopf DE, et al.: Enzalutamide in metastatic prostate cancer before chemotherapy. N Engl J Med 371 (5): 424-33, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Loriot Y, Miller K, Sternberg CN, et al.: Effect of enzalutamide on health-related quality of life, pain, and skeletal-related events in asymptomatic and minimally symptomatic, chemotherapy-naive patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (PREVAIL): results from a randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 16 (5): 509-21, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Beer TM, Armstrong AJ, Rathkopf D, et al.: Enzalutamide in Men with Chemotherapy-naïve Metastatic Castration-resistant Prostate Cancer: Extended Analysis of the Phase 3 PREVAIL Study. Eur Urol 71 (2): 151-154, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Hussain M, Fizazi K, Saad F, et al.: Enzalutamide in Men with Nonmetastatic, Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 378 (26): 2465-2474, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Attard G, Borre M, Gurney H, et al.: Abiraterone Alone or in Combination With Enzalutamide in Metastatic Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer With Rising Prostate-Specific Antigen During Enzalutamide Treatment. J Clin Oncol 36 (25): 2639-2646, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Smith MR, Saad F, Chowdhury S, et al.: Apalutamide Treatment and Metastasis-free Survival in Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 378 (15): 1408-1418, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Saad F, Cella D, Basch E, et al.: Effect of apalutamide on health-related quality of life in patients with non-metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer: an analysis of the SPARTAN randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 19 (10): 1404-1416, 2018. [PUBMED Abstract] Fizazi K, Shore N, Tammela TL, et al.: Darolutamide in Nonmetastatic, Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 380 (13): 1235-1246, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Fizazi K, Shore N, Tammela TL, et al.: Nonmetastatic, Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer and Survival with Darolutamide. N Engl J Med 383 (11): 1040-1049, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] de Bono JS, Logothetis CJ, Molina A, et al.: Abiraterone and increased survival in metastatic prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 364 (21): 1995-2005, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Harland S, Staffurth J, Molina A, et al.: Effect of abiraterone acetate treatment on the quality of life of patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer after failure of docetaxel chemotherapy. Eur J Cancer 49 (17): 3648-57, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Scher HI, Fizazi K, Saad F, et al.: Increased survival with enzalutamide in prostate cancer after chemotherapy. N Engl J Med 367 (13): 1187-97, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Fizazi K, Scher HI, Miller K, et al.: Effect of enzalutamide on time to first skeletal-related event, pain, and quality of life in men with castration-resistant prostate cancer: results from the randomised, phase 3 AFFIRM trial. Lancet Oncol 15 (10): 1147-56, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Sternberg CN, de Bono JS, Chi KN, et al.: Improved outcomes in elderly patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer treated with the androgen receptor inhibitor enzalutamide: results from the phase III AFFIRM trial. Ann Oncol 25 (2): 429-34, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Cella D, Ivanescu C, Holmstrom S, et al.: Impact of enzalutamide on quality of life in men with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer after chemotherapy: additional analyses from the AFFIRM randomized clinical trial. Ann Oncol 26 (1): 179-85, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Fizazi K, Carducci M, Smith M, et al.: Denosumab versus zoledronic acid for treatment of bone metastases in men with castration-resistant prostate cancer: a randomised, double-blind study. Lancet 377 (9768): 813-22, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Scher HI, Chung LW: Bone metastases: improving the therapeutic index. Semin Oncol 21 (5): 630-56, 1994. [PUBMED Abstract] Dearnaley DP, Sydes MR, Mason MD, et al.: A double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trial of oral sodium clodronate for metastatic prostate cancer (MRC PR05 Trial). J Natl Cancer Inst 95 (17): 1300-11, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Ernst DS, Tannock IF, Winquist EW, et al.: Randomized, double-blind, controlled trial of mitoxantrone/prednisone and clodronate versus mitoxantrone/prednisone and placebo in patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer and pain. J Clin Oncol 21 (17): 3335-42, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Saad F, Gleason DM, Murray R, et al.: Long-term efficacy of zoledronic acid for the prevention of skeletal complications in patients with metastatic hormone-refractory prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 96 (11): 879-82, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Kaasa S, Brenne E, Lund JA, et al.: Prospective randomised multicenter trial on single fraction radiotherapy (8 Gy x 1) versus multiple fractions (3 Gy x 10) in the treatment of painful bone metastases. Radiother Oncol 79 (3): 278-84, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Chow E, Harris K, Fan G, et al.: Palliative radiotherapy trials for bone metastases: a systematic review. J Clin Oncol 25 (11): 1423-36, 2007. [PUBMED Abstract] Robinson RG: Strontium-89--precursor targeted therapy for pain relief of blastic metastatic disease. Cancer 72 (11 Suppl): 3433-5, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Oosterhof GO, Roberts JT, de Reijke TM, et al.: Strontium(89) chloride versus palliative local field radiotherapy in patients with hormonal escaped prostate cancer: a phase III study of the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer, Genitourinary Group. Eur Urol 44 (5): 519-26, 2003. [PUBMED Abstract] Porter AT, McEwan AJ, Powe JE, et al.: Results of a randomized phase-III trial to evaluate the efficacy of strontium-89 adjuvant to local field external beam irradiation in the management of endocrine resistant metastatic prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 25 (5): 805-13, 1993. [PUBMED Abstract] Smith MR, Saad F, Coleman R, et al.: Denosumab and bone-metastasis-free survival in men with castration-resistant prostate cancer: results of a phase 3, randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 379 (9810): 39-46, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract] Tannock IF, Osoba D, Stockler MR, et al.: Chemotherapy with mitoxantrone plus prednisone or prednisone alone for symptomatic hormone-resistant prostate cancer: a Canadian randomized trial with palliative end points. J Clin Oncol 14 (6): 1756-64, 1996. [PUBMED Abstract] Tannock IF, de Wit R, Berry WR, et al.: Docetaxel plus prednisone or mitoxantrone plus prednisone for advanced prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 351 (15): 1502-12, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Berthold DR, Pond GR, Soban F, et al.: Docetaxel plus prednisone or mitoxantrone plus prednisone for advanced prostate cancer: updated survival in the TAX 327 study. J Clin Oncol 26 (2): 242-5, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract] Petrylak DP, Tangen CM, Hussain MH, et al.: Docetaxel and estramustine compared with mitoxantrone and prednisone for advanced refractory prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 351 (15): 1513-20, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract] Berry DL, Moinpour CM, Jiang CS, et al.: Quality of life and pain in advanced stage prostate cancer: results of a Southwest Oncology Group randomized trial comparing docetaxel and estramustine to mitoxantrone and prednisone. J Clin Oncol 24 (18): 2828-35, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Kellokumpu-Lehtinen PL, Harmenberg U, Joensuu T, et al.: 2-Weekly versus 3-weekly docetaxel to treat castration-resistant advanced prostate cancer: a randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 14 (2): 117-24, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Oudard S, Fizazi K, Sengeløv L, et al.: Cabazitaxel Versus Docetaxel As First-Line Therapy for Patients With Metastatic Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer: A Randomized Phase III Trial-FIRSTANA. J Clin Oncol 35 (28): 3189-3197, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] de Bono JS, Oudard S, Ozguroglu M, et al.: Prednisone plus cabazitaxel or mitoxantrone for metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer progressing after docetaxel treatment: a randomised open-label trial. Lancet 376 (9747): 1147-54, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Eisenberger M, Hardy-Bessard AC, Kim CS, et al.: Phase III Study Comparing a Reduced Dose of Cabazitaxel (20 mg/m(2)) and the Currently Approved Dose (25 mg/m(2)) in Postdocetaxel Patients With Metastatic Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer-PROSELICA. J Clin Oncol 35 (28): 3198-3206, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Petrylak DP, Macarthur RB, O'Connor J, et al.: Phase I trial of docetaxel with estramustine in androgen-independent prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 17 (3): 958-67, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Millikan RE: Chemotherapy of advanced prostatic carcinoma. Semin Oncol 26 (2): 185-91, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract] Amato RJ, Logothetis CJ, Hallinan R, et al.: Chemotherapy for small cell carcinoma of prostatic origin. J Urol 147 (3 Pt 2): 935-7, 1992. [PUBMED Abstract] Hall SJ, Klotz L, Pantuck AJ, et al.: Integrated safety data from 4 randomized, double-blind, controlled trials of autologous cellular immunotherapy with sipuleucel-T in patients with prostate cancer. J Urol 186 (3): 877-81, 2011. [PUBMED Abstract] Kantoff PW, Higano CS, Shore ND, et al.: Sipuleucel-T immunotherapy for castration-resistant prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 363 (5): 411-22, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Longo DL: New therapies for castration-resistant prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 363 (5): 479-81, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Higano CS, Schellhammer PF, Small EJ, et al.: Integrated data from 2 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trials of active cellular immunotherapy with sipuleucel-T in advanced prostate cancer. Cancer 115 (16): 3670-9, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Small EJ, Schellhammer PF, Higano CS, et al.: Placebo-controlled phase III trial of immunologic therapy with sipuleucel-T (APC8015) in patients with metastatic, asymptomatic hormone refractory prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 24 (19): 3089-94, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Tannock I, Gospodarowicz M, Meakin W, et al.: Treatment of metastatic prostatic cancer with low-dose prednisone: evaluation of pain and quality of life as pragmatic indices of response. J Clin Oncol 7 (5): 590-7, 1989. [PUBMED Abstract] Fosså SD, Slee PH, Brausi M, et al.: Flutamide versus prednisone in patients with prostate cancer symptomatically progressing after androgen-ablative therapy: a phase III study of the European organization for research and treatment of cancer genitourinary group. J Clin Oncol 19 (1): 62-71, 2001. [PUBMED Abstract] Parker C, Nilsson S, Heinrich D, et al.: Alpha emitter radium-223 and survival in metastatic prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 369 (3): 213-23, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Sartor O, Coleman R, Nilsson S, et al.: Effect of radium-223 dichloride on symptomatic skeletal events in patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer and bone metastases: results from a phase 3, double-blind, randomised trial. Lancet Oncol 15 (7): 738-46, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Hussain M, Mateo J, Fizazi K, et al.: Survival with Olaparib in Metastatic Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med 383 (24): 2345-2357, 2020. [PUBMED Abstract] These references have been identified by members of the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board as significant in the field of prostate cancer treatment.  This list is provided to inform users of important studies that have helped shape the current understanding of and treatment options for prostate cancer. Listed after each reference are the sections within this summary where the reference is cited. Beer TM, Armstrong AJ, Rathkopf DE, et al.: Enzalutamide in metastatic prostate cancer before chemotherapy. N Engl J Med 371 (5): 424-33, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:Treatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer Berthold DR, Pond GR, Soban F, et al.: Docetaxel plus prednisone or mitoxantrone plus prednisone for advanced prostate cancer: updated survival in the TAX 327 study. J Clin Oncol 26 (2): 242-5, 2008. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:Treatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer Bill-Axelson A, Holmberg L, Garmo H, et al.: Radical prostatectomy or watchful waiting in early prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 370 (10): 932-42, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:Treatment Option Overview for Prostate CancerTreatment of Stage II Prostate Cancer de Bono JS, Oudard S, Ozguroglu M, et al.: Prednisone plus cabazitaxel or mitoxantrone for metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer progressing after docetaxel treatment: a randomised open-label trial. Lancet 376 (9747): 1147-54, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:Treatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer Lu-Yao GL, Albertsen PC, Moore DF, et al.: Outcomes of localized prostate cancer following conservative management. JAMA 302 (11): 1202-9, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:General Information About Prostate CancerTreatment Option Overview for Prostate Cancer Mason MD, Parulekar WR, Sydes MR, et al.: Final Report of the Intergroup Randomized Study of Combined Androgen-Deprivation Therapy Plus Radiotherapy Versus Androgen-Deprivation Therapy Alone in Locally Advanced Prostate Cancer. J Clin Oncol 33 (19): 2143-50, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:Treatment of Stage II Prostate CancerTreatment of Stage III Prostate Cancer Parker C, Nilsson S, Heinrich D, et al.: Alpha emitter radium-223 and survival in metastatic prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 369 (3): 213-23, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:Treatment Option Overview for Prostate CancerTreatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer Potosky AL, Davis WW, Hoffman RM, et al.: Five-year outcomes after prostatectomy or radiotherapy for prostate cancer: the prostate cancer outcomes study. J Natl Cancer Inst 96 (18): 1358-67, 2004. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:Treatment Option Overview for Prostate Cancer Pound CR, Partin AW, Eisenberger MA, et al.: Natural history of progression after PSA elevation following radical prostatectomy. JAMA 281 (17): 1591-7, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:General Information About Prostate Cancer Ryan CJ, Smith MR, Fizazi K, et al.: Abiraterone acetate plus prednisone versus placebo plus prednisone in chemotherapy-naive men with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (COU-AA-302): final overall survival analysis of a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 study. Lancet Oncol 16 (2): 152-60, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:Treatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer Scher HI, Fizazi K, Saad F, et al.: Increased survival with enzalutamide in prostate cancer after chemotherapy. N Engl J Med 367 (13): 1187-97, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:Treatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer Seidenfeld J, Samson DJ, Aronson N, et al.: Relative effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of methods of androgen suppression in the treatment of advanced prostate cancer. Evid Rep Technol Assess (Summ) (4): I-x, 1-246, I1-36, passim, 1999. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:Treatment of Stage I Prostate CancerTreatment of Stage II Prostate CancerTreatment of Stage III Prostate CancerTreatment of Stage IV Prostate Cancer Sternberg CN, Castellano D, Daugaard G, et al.: Abiraterone acetate for patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer progressing after chemotherapy: final analysis of a multicentre, open-label, early-access protocol trial. Lancet Oncol 15 (11): 1263-8, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:Treatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer Thompson IM, Tangen CM, Paradelo J, et al.: Adjuvant radiotherapy for pathological T3N0M0 prostate cancer significantly reduces risk of metastases and improves survival: long-term followup of a randomized clinical trial. J Urol 181 (3): 956-62, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:Treatment of Stage I Prostate CancerTreatment of Stage II Prostate CancerTreatment of Stage III Prostate Cancer Wilt TJ, Brawer MK, Jones KM, et al.: Radical prostatectomy versus observation for localized prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 367 (3): 203-13, 2012. [PUBMED Abstract]Cited in:General Information About Prostate CancerTreatment Option Overview for Prostate CancerTreatment of Stage I Prostate CancerTreatment of Stage II Prostate Cancer Cited in: Treatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer Cited in: Treatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer Cited in: Treatment Option Overview for Prostate Cancer Treatment of Stage II Prostate Cancer Cited in: Treatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer Cited in: General Information About Prostate Cancer Treatment Option Overview for Prostate Cancer Cited in: Treatment of Stage II Prostate Cancer Treatment of Stage III Prostate Cancer Cited in: Treatment Option Overview for Prostate Cancer Treatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer Cited in: Treatment Option Overview for Prostate Cancer Cited in: General Information About Prostate Cancer Cited in: Treatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer Cited in: Treatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer Cited in: Treatment of Stage I Prostate Cancer Treatment of Stage II Prostate Cancer Treatment of Stage III Prostate Cancer Treatment of Stage IV Prostate Cancer Cited in: Treatment of Recurrent or Hormone-Resistant Prostate Cancer Cited in: Treatment of Stage I Prostate Cancer Treatment of Stage II Prostate Cancer Treatment of Stage III Prostate Cancer Cited in: General Information About Prostate Cancer Treatment Option Overview for Prostate Cancer Treatment of Stage I Prostate Cancer Treatment of Stage II Prostate Cancer The PDQ cancer information summaries are reviewed regularly and updated as new information becomes available.  This section describes the latest changes made to this summary as of the date above. General Information About Prostate Cancer Revised text to state that the 5-year relative survival rate for men diagnosed in the United States from 2013 to 2019 with local or regional disease was greater than 99%, and  the rate for distant disease was 34%. Updated statistics with estimated new cases and deaths for 2024 (cited American Cancer Society as reference 2). This summary is written and maintained by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board, which is
editorially independent of NCI.  The summary reflects an independent review of
the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or NIH.  More
information about summary policies and the role of the PDQ Editorial Boards  in
maintaining the PDQ summaries can be found on the About This PDQ Summary and PDQ® Cancer Information for Health Professionals pages. This PDQ cancer information summary for health professionals provides comprehensive, peer-reviewed, evidence-based information about the treatment of prostate cancer. It is intended as a resource to inform and assist clinicians in the care of their patients.  It does not provide formal guidelines or recommendations for making health care decisions. This summary is reviewed regularly and updated as necessary by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board, which is editorially independent of the National Cancer Institute (NCI).  The summary reflects an independent review of the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Board members review recently published articles each month to determine whether an article should: be discussed at a meeting, be cited with text, or replace or update an existing article that is already cited. Changes to the summaries are made through a consensus process in which Board members evaluate the strength of the evidence in  the published articles and determine how the article should be included in the summary. The lead reviewer for Prostate Cancer Treatment is: Timothy Gilligan, MD (Cleveland Clinic Taussig Cancer Institute) Any comments or questions about the summary content should be submitted to Cancer.gov through the NCI website's Email Us. Do not contact the individual Board Members with questions or comments about the summaries. Board members will not respond to individual inquiries. Some of the reference citations in this summary are accompanied by a level-of-evidence designation. These designations are intended to help readers assess the strength of the evidence supporting the use of specific interventions or approaches. The PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board uses a formal evidence ranking system in developing its level-of-evidence designations. PDQ is a registered trademark. Although the content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text, it cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless it is presented in its entirety and is regularly updated. However, an author would be permitted to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks succinctly: [include excerpt from the summary].” The preferred citation for this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Adult Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Prostate Cancer Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/prostate/hp/prostate-treatment-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389471] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use within the PDQ summaries only. Permission to use images outside the context of PDQ information must be obtained from the owner(s) and cannot be granted by  the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the illustrations in this summary, along with many other cancer-related images, is available in Visuals Online, a collection of over 2,000 scientific images. Based on the strength of the available evidence, treatment options may be described as either “standard” or “under clinical evaluation.” These classifications should not be used as a basis for insurance reimbursement determinations. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s Email Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Regorafenib - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/regorafenib
txt: Regorafenib works by blocking proteins that signal cancer cells to divide. It also blocks proteins that signal the growth of new blood vessels that tumors need to grow. Blocking these signals keeps cancer cells from growing and spreading to other parts of the body. Regorafenib is a type of targeted therapy drug called a kinase inhibitor. It is a small-molecule drug (a drug that can enter cells easily). FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Regorafenib
         is approved 
         to treat:  Colorectal cancer that has spread to other parts of the body. It is used in patients who have not gotten better with other treatments.  Gastrointestinal stromal tumor that has spread or cannot be removed by surgery. It is used in patients whose cancer has not gotten better with imatinib mesylate and sunitinib malate. Hepatocellular carcinoma (a type of liver cancer).  It is used in patients who have already been treated with sorafenib. Regorafenib
         is also being studied in the treatment of other types of
         cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Regorafenib - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Targeted Therapy to Treat Cancer Find Clinical Trials for Regorafenib - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: What Does Melanoma Look Like? - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/skin/melanoma-photos
txt: Melanoma is a type of cancer that begins in melanocytes (cells that make the pigment melanin). Below are photos of melanoma that formed on the skin. Melanoma can also start in the eye, the intestines, or other areas of the body with pigmented tissues. Often the first sign of melanoma is a change in the shape, color, size, or feel of an existing mole. However, melanoma may also appear as a new mole. People should tell their doctor if they notice any changes on the skin. The only way to diagnose melanoma is to remove tissue and check it for cancer cells. Thinking of "ABCDE" can help you remember what to look for: Asymmetry: The shape of one half does not match the other half.  Border that is irregular: The edges are often ragged, notched, or blurred in outline. The pigment may spread into the surrounding skin.  Color that is uneven: Shades of black, brown, and tan may be present. Areas of white, gray, red, pink, or blue may also be seen.  Diameter: There is a change in size, usually an increase. Melanomas can be tiny, but most are larger than the size of a pea (larger than 6 millimeters or about 1/4 inch).  Evolving: The mole has changed over the past few weeks or months.  Melanomas can vary greatly in how they look. Many show all of the ABCDE features. However, some may show changes or abnormal areas in only one or two of the ABCDE features. In more advanced melanoma, the texture of the mole may change. The skin on the surface may break down and look scraped. It may become hard or lumpy. The surface may ooze or bleed. Sometimes the melanoma is itchy, tender, or painful. A large, asymmetrical melanoma with an uneven color and irregular border A large, asymmetrical melanoma that is more than 10 millimeters (about 1/2 inch) wide A melanoma with uneven color, an irregular border, and a scaly or flaky area A melanoma with an irregular border A melanoma with uneven color and an irregular border
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: About NCRA - NCI Council of Research Advocates - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/oar/ncra
txt: NCI Council of Research Advocates (NCRA) Board Members The Office of Advocacy Relations (OAR) manages the NCI Council of Research Advocates (NCRA), the only federal advisory committee comprised solely of advocate leaders at NCI. NCRA  convenes around broad cancer research issues and provides the Director with advice and strategic insights from the community's perspective. NCRA members are selected for their expert knowledge of cancer research and policy, as well as their ability to represent a broad patient perspective. Prior NCRA meeting agendas and summaries can be found through the NCI Division of Extramural Activities. Annie Ellis 
2024
Research Advocate
Gynecologic Cancer Steering Committee
Ovarian Cancer Research Alliance
New York, New York 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Childhood Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma Treatment - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/eye/patient/child-intraocular-melanoma-treatment-pdq
txt:  General Information About Intraocular Melanoma  Stages of Childhood Intraocular Melanoma  Treatment Option Overview  Treatment of Childhood Intraocular Melanoma  Treatment of Recurrent Childhood Intraocular Melanoma  To Learn More About Childhood Intraocular Melanoma  About This PDQ Summary  Intraocular melanoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the eye. Having a fair complexion and certain conditions can
		  affect the risk of melanoma. Signs and symptoms of intraocular melanoma include trouble seeing or a dark spot on the iris. Tests that examine the eye are used to diagnose intraocular melanoma. Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery). Intraocular melanoma begins in the middle of three layers of the wall of the eye. The outer layer  includes the white sclera (the "white of the eye") and the clear cornea at the front of the eye. The inner layer  has a lining of nerve tissue, called the retina,  which senses light and sends images along the optic nerve to the brain. The middle layer, where intraocular melanoma forms, is called  the uvea or uveal tract, and has three main parts: the iris, the ciliary body, and the choroid. Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn’t mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your child's doctor if you think your child may be at risk. Risk factors for childhood intraocular melanoma include the following: Light eye color. Fair skin color. Not being able to tan. Oculodermal melanocytosis. Cutaneous nevi. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by intraocular melanoma or by other conditions. Check with your child's doctor if your child has any of the following: Trouble seeing. Dark spot on the iris (colored part of the eye). A bulging eye. The following tests and procedures may be used: Physical exam and health history: An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patient’s health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. Ultrasound: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes.  The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. The picture can be printed to be looked at later. Fluorescein angiography: A test used to take pictures of the retina in the eye. A yellow dye is injected into a vein and travels throughout the body including the blood vessels in the eye. The yellow dye causes the vessels in the eye to fluoresce when a picture is taken. Prognosis depends on the following: The size of the tumor. The child's age. Whether the tumor is in the ciliary body. Whether the tumor is outside the sclera. Whether the tumor has spread within the eye or to other places in the body. Whether there are certain changes in the genes linked to intraocular melanoma. After intraocular melanoma has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the eye or to other parts of the body. There are three ways cancer spreads in the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. Sometimes intraocular melanoma comes back after treatment. The process used to find out if cancer has spread to areas near the eye or to other parts of the body is called staging. There is no standard staging system for childhood intraocular melanoma. The tests and procedures used to diagnose cancer and other tests and procedures may be used to find out if cancer has spread and plan treatment: Liver function tests: A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by the liver. A higher than normal amount of a substance can be a sign that cancer has spread to the liver. CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the chest or liver, taken from different angles.  The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.  This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography.EnlargeComputed tomography (CT) scan. The child lies on a table that slides through the CT scanner, which takes a series of detailed x-ray pictures of areas inside the body. MRI: A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the liver. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI).EnlargeMagnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan. The child lies on a table that slides into the MRI machine, which takes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. The positioning of the child on the table depends on the part of the body being imaged. Chest x-ray: An x-ray of the chest. An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if  intraocular melanoma spreads to the liver, the cancer cells in the liver are actually intraocular melanoma cells. The disease is metastatic intraocular melanoma, not liver cancer. The cancer may come back in the eye or in other parts of the body, such as in the lung or liver. There are different types of treatment for children with intraocular melanoma. Children with intraocular melanoma should have their treatment planned by a team of doctors who are experts in treating childhood cancer. Three types of standard treatment are used:SurgeryRadiation therapyLaser surgery New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials.Targeted therapy Treatment for childhood intraocular melanoma may cause side effects. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Follow-up tests may be needed. Surgery Radiation therapy Laser surgery Targeted therapy Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials.  A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the  standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Because cancer in children is rare, taking part in a clinical trial should be considered.  Some clinical trials are open only to patients  who have not started treatment. Treatment will be overseen by a pediatric oncologist, a doctor who specializes in treating children with cancer. The pediatric oncologist works with other pediatric health professionals who are experts in treating children with cancer and who specialize in certain areas of medicine. This may include the following specialists and others: Pediatrician. Pediatric surgeon. Radiation oncologist. Pediatric ophthalmologist. Social worker. Rehabilitation specialist. Psychologist. Child-life specialist. During surgery, all or part of the eye with cancer is removed. Whether all or part of the eye is removed during surgery depends on the size of the cancer and where it is in the eye. Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells  or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the area of the body with cancer. Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. For intraocular melanoma, localized plaque radiation therapy is used. Radioactive seeds are attached to one side of a disk, called a plaque, and placed directly on the outside wall of the 
 eye near the tumor.  The 
 side of the plaque with the seeds on it faces the eyeball, aiming radiation at the tumor. The plaque helps  protect other nearby tissue from the radiation.EnlargePlaque radiotherapy of the eye.  A type of radiation therapy used to treat eye tumors. Radioactive seeds are placed on one side of a thin piece of metal (usually gold) called a plaque.  The plaque is sewn onto the outside wall of the eye.  The seeds give off radiation which kills the cancer. The plaque is removed at the end of treatment, which usually lasts for several days. Laser surgery uses a laser beam (a narrow beam of intense light) to turn the cancer cells into a gas that evaporates (dissolves into the air). This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells. Targeted therapies usually cause less harm to normal cells than chemotherapy or radiation therapy do. Targeted therapy is being studied for the treatment of childhood intraocular melanoma that has recurred (come back). To learn more about side effects that begin during treatment for cancer, visit Side Effects. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer  treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first  to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. As your child goes through treatment, they will have follow-up tests or checkups. Some tests that were done to diagnose or stage the cancer may be repeated to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your child's condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of newly diagnosed intraocular melanoma in children is like treatment for adults and may include the following: Surgery to remove the tumor. Radiation therapy. Laser surgery. See the PDQ summary on adult Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma Treatment  for more information. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of recurrent intraocular melanoma in children may include the following: A clinical trial that checks a sample of the patient's tumor for certain gene changes. The type of targeted therapy that will be given to the patient depends on the type of gene change. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For more information from the National Cancer Institute about intraocular melanoma, see the following: Intraocular (Eye) Melanoma Home Page Computed Tomography (CT) Scans and Cancer Targeted Cancer Therapies Lasers to Treat Cancer For more childhood cancer information and other general cancer resources, visit: About Cancer Childhood Cancers CureSearch for Children's Cancer Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer Adolescents and Young Adults with Cancer Children with Cancer: A Guide for Parents Cancer in Children and Adolescents Staging Coping with Cancer Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer For Survivors and Caregivers Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish. PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the treatment of childhood intraocular (uveal) melanoma.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board. A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Childhood Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/eye/patient/child-intraocular-melanoma-treatment-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online. Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Site Map - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-website/sitemap
txt: Links to contact information, NCI social media, website policy, and help information can be found in the footer of every page. For information in Spanish, see the site map for NCI's Cancer.gov en español.  Understanding Cancer
What Is Cancer?
Cancer Statistics
Cancer Disparities    Causes and Prevention
Risk Factors
Genetics
Cancer Prevention Overview    Screening
Cancer Screening Overview
Screening Tests    Diagnosis and Staging
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Staging
Prognosis    Treatment
Types of Treatment
Side Effects
Cancer Drugs
Complementary and Alternative Medicine    Coping
Emotions and Cancer
Adjusting to Cancer
Self Image and Sexuality
Day-to-Day Life
Support for Caregivers
Survivorship
Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer    Advanced Cancer
Choices for Care
Talking about Advanced Cancer
Coping with Your Feelings
Planning for Advanced Cancer
Advanced Cancer and Caregivers    Managing Cancer Care
Finding Health Care Services
Managing Costs and Medical Information
Advance Directives
Using Trusted Resources    What Is Cancer?  Cancer Statistics  Cancer Disparities  Risk Factors  Genetics  Cancer Prevention Overview  Cancer Screening Overview  Screening Tests  Symptoms  Diagnosis  Staging  Prognosis  Types of Treatment  Side Effects  Cancer Drugs  Complementary and Alternative Medicine  Emotions and Cancer  Adjusting to Cancer  Self Image and Sexuality  Day-to-Day Life  Support for Caregivers  Survivorship  Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer  Choices for Care  Talking about Advanced Cancer  Coping with Your Feelings  Planning for Advanced Cancer  Advanced Cancer and Caregivers  Finding Health Care Services  Managing Costs and Medical Information  Advance Directives  Using Trusted Resources  NCI's Role in Cancer Research
Intramural Research
Extramural Research
Supporting the Cancer Research Workforce 
Partners and Collaborators  NCI Research Areas
Cancer Biology
Cancer Genomics
Causes of Cancer
Detection and Diagnosis
Prevention
Treatment
Cancer and Public Health
Cancer Health Disparities
Childhood Cancers Research
Global Health  Cancer Research Infrastructure
NCI-Designated Cancer Centers
Clinical Trials Programs and Initiatives
Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research
Bioinformatics, Big Data, and Cancer  Key Initiatives  Professional Judgment Budget Proposal  Partners in Cancer Research
Clinical Trials Information for Patients and Caregivers  Resources for Researchers  Progress in Cancer Research
Annual Report to the Nation
Research Advances by Cancer Type
Stories of Discovery
Milestones in Cancer Research and Discovery  Intramural Research  Extramural Research  Supporting the Cancer Research Workforce  Partners and Collaborators  Cancer Biology  Cancer Genomics  Causes of Cancer  Detection and Diagnosis  Prevention  Treatment  Cancer and Public Health  Cancer Health Disparities  Childhood Cancers Research  Global Health  NCI-Designated Cancer Centers  Clinical Trials Programs and Initiatives  Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research  Bioinformatics, Big Data, and Cancer  Clinical Trials Information for Patients and Caregivers  Annual Report to the Nation  Research Advances by Cancer Type  Stories of Discovery  Milestones in Cancer Research and Discovery  News Releases
	2021
2020
2019
2018
2017
2016  Resources for News Media  Events
Scientific Meetings and Lectures
Conferences
Advisory Board Meetings
NCI Social Media Events  Cancer Currents: An NCI Cancer Research Blog  2021  2020  2019  2018  2017  2016  Scientific Meetings and Lectures  Conferences  Advisory Board Meetings  NCI Social Media Events  Common Cancer Types
Bladder Cancer
Breast Cancer
Colorectal Cancer
Kidney (Renal Cell) Cancer
Leukemia
Liver Cancer
Lung Cancer
Lymphoma
Pancreatic Cancer
Prostate Cancer
Skin Cancer
Thyroid Cancer
Uterine Cancer  A to Z List of Cancers  Cancers by Body Location  Childhood Cancers  Adolescent and Young Adult Cancers  Metastatic Cancer  Recurrent Cancer  Bladder Cancer  Breast Cancer  Colorectal Cancer  Kidney (Renal Cell) Cancer  Leukemia  Liver Cancer  Lung Cancer  Lymphoma  Pancreatic Cancer  Prostate Cancer  Skin Cancer  Thyroid Cancer  Uterine Cancer  Research Grants
Funding Opportunities
Research Program Contacts
Funding Strategy  Apply For a Grant
Application Development & Submission
Receipt & Assignment
Peer Review & Funding Outcomes
Award Negotiation & Issuance  Grants Policies and Process
Introduction to Grants Process
NCI Grant Policies
Legal Requirements  Manage Your Award
Grants Management Contacts
Monitoring
Prior Approvals
Annual Reporting and Auditing
Transfer of a Grant
Grant Closeout  Training 
Cancer Training at NCI
Resources for Trainees
Funding for Cancer Training
Building a Diverse Workforce
Training Program Contacts  Contracts and Small Business  NCI Bottom Line Blog  Funding Opportunities  Research Program Contacts  Funding Strategy  Application Development & Submission  Receipt & Assignment  Peer Review & Funding Outcomes  Award Negotiation & Issuance  Introduction to Grants Process  NCI Grant Policies  Legal Requirements  Grants Management Contacts  Monitoring  Prior Approvals  Annual Reporting and Auditing  Transfer of a Grant  Grant Closeout  Cancer Training at NCI  Resources for Trainees  Funding for Cancer Training  Building a Diverse Workforce  Training Program Contacts   Overview & Mission
History of NCI
Contributing to Cancer Research     Senior Leadership
Director
Previous NCI Directors    NCI Organization  NCI Advisory Boards, Committees, and Review Groups    Budget and Appropriations
Current Year Budget
Professional Judgment Budget Proposal
Congressional Justification
NCI Budget Fact Book     Legislative Activities
Hearings & Testimonies
Current Congress
Committees of Interest
Legislative Resources
Recent Public Laws    Careers  Visitor Information  History of NCI  Contributing to Cancer Research  Director  Previous NCI Directors  Current Year Budget  Professional Judgment Budget Proposal  Congressional Justification  NCI Budget Fact Book  Hearings & Testimonies  Current Congress  Committees of Interest  Legislative Resources  Recent Public Laws 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/ccg/research/functional-genomics/ctd2/data-portal/university-texas-md-anderson-cancer-center
txt:  Characterization of PIK3R1 Neomorphic Mutations  High-throughput Screening Identifying Driving Mutations in Endometrial Cancer  Phenotypic Examination of PIK3CA Allelic Series Using MCF10A Cell Sensor Platform  Systematic Functional Annotation of Somatic Mutations in Cancer  Informer Drug Library Screening Against Patient-derived PDGFRA Mutations  Characterization of PIK3R1 Neomorphic Mutations High-throughput Screening Identifying Driving Mutations in Endometrial Cancer Phenotypic Examination of PIK3CA Allelic Series Using MCF10A Cell Sensor Platform Systematic Functional Annotation of Somatic Mutations in Cancer Informer Drug Library Screening Against Patient-derived PDGFRA Mutations Characterization of PIK3R1 Neomorphic Mutations Principal Investigator
Gordon B. Mills, M.D., Ph.D. ContactPrahlad Ram ReferenceCheung et al. (Cancer Cell, 2014) Data Raw/Analyzed Data (.zip file)  Dashboard Submission(s)  The goal of this project was to functionally characterize the most frequent mutation of the PIK3R1 gene and to explore potential therapeutic approaches to target the aberration. Cytotoxicity Screen A high-throughput BaF3 differential cytotoxicity screen was used to examine whether specific mutations in PIK3R1 alter sensitivity towards a collection of 145 compounds targeting major signaling pathways. The normally interleukin 3 (IL3)-dependent BaF3 cells were rendered IL3-independent by stable expression of the mutants. Importantly, growth inhibition or cell death induced by inhibitors can be rescued by exogenous IL3, providing an internal control, or “counterscreen” for the cytotoxic activity of the compounds. The day before treatment, stable construct expressing BaF3 cells were seeded in 96-well plates in medium with or without IL3. Cells were treated with DMSO or inhibitors (1 nM to 10 μM) in the presence or absence of IL3 for 72 hours. Cell viability was determined using PrestoBlue (Promega, Madison, WI). Two independent experiments, each in duplicate, were performed. Some of these compounds were also tested in a panel of parental endometrial or ovarian cancer cells. Reverse-Phase Protein Lysate Microarray (RPPA) To determine whether pathway activation correlates with drug sensitivity, reverse-phase protein arrays (RPPA) were performed with the BaF3 stable cells in the RPPA Core Facility in MD Anderson Cancer Center. Protein lysates were arrayed on nitrocellulose-coated slides, which were then probed with validated primary antibodies plus biotin-conjugated secondary antibodies. The signal obtained was amplified and visualized. The slides were scanned, analyzed, and quantified to generate spot intensity. Each dilution curve was fitted with a logistic model (“Supercurve Fitting” developed by the Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology in MD Anderson Cancer Center, “https://bioinformatics.mdanderson.org/”). This fits a single curve using all the samples (i.e., dilution series) on a slide with the signal intensity as the response variable and the dilution steps are independent variable. The fitted curve is plotted with the signal intensities both observed and fitted on the y-axis and the log2-concentration of proteins on the x-axis for diagnostic purposes. The protein concentrations of each set of slides were then normalized by median polish, which was corrected across samples by the linear expression values using the median expression levels of all antibody experiments to calculate a loading correction factor for each sample. BaF3 Cell Viability Assay This assay was used to determine the oncogenic potential of the aberration. Plasmid constructs for expression of the mutants were introduced into BaF3 cells by electroporation. PrestoBlue was then added to assess cell viability. In vitro Functional Assays Endometrial cancer cells stably expressing the PIK3R1 mutations were subjected to in vitro functional assays to assess the tumorigenic effects of the mutations and to investigate whether the effects could be blocked by inhibitors. The assays measured cell proliferation indicated by BrdU incorporation and cell apoptosis indicated by DNA fragmentation. In vivo Tumorigenicity Assay The assay was used to evaluate the antitumor effect of inhibitors in vivo. All animal experiments were approved by MDACC's Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Animal care was followed according to Institutional guidelines. Endometrial cancer cells or parental OVK18 ovarian cancer cells were injected subcutaneously into female athymic (nu/nu) mice (National Cancer Institute, Fredrick, MD). Treatments began on day 21 post-implantation. Tumor measurements were taken and total tumor volume was estimated. Antitumor effects are expressed as tumor growth inhibition (TGI; treated versus control), calculated by the equation, %TGI=100 − [100 × (T − T0)/(C − C0)]. High-throughput Screening Identifying Driving Mutations in Endometrial Cancer Principal Investigator
Gordon B. Mills, M.D., Ph.D. ContactPrahlad Ram ReferenceLiang et al. (Genome Res, 2012) Data Raw/Analyzed Data (.zip file)  Dashboard Submission(s)  Recent advances in next-generation sequencing technology have enabled the unprecedented characterization of a full spectrum of somatic alterations in cancer genomes. Given the large numbers of somatic mutations typically detected by this approach, a key challenge in the downstream analysis is to distinguish “drivers” that functionally contribute to tumorigenesis from “passengers” that occur as the consequence of genomic instability. For this study, the CTD² Center at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center implemented a systems biology approach to identify driver cancer genes in endometrial cancers. Whole exome sequencing was performed on 13 endometrial cancers along with matched normal samples to detect somatic alterations with high precision and sensitivity. For validated mutated genes, bioinformatics prioritization was combined with high throughput screening of shRNA and overexpression constructs in a highly sensitive BaF3 cell viability assay to identify candidate driver cancer genes. The BaF3 cell line is a murine bone marrow-derived pro-B-cell line that depends on interleukin-3 (IL-3) for proliferation, but readily becomes IL3-independent in the presence of an oncogene or oncogenic event. Phenotypic Examination of PIK3CA Allelic Series Using MCF10A Cell Sensor Platform Principal Investigator
Gordon B. Mills, M.D., Ph.D. ContactPrahlad Ram ReferenceDogruluk et al. (Cancer Res, 2015) Data Raw/Analyzed Data (.zip file)  Dashboard Submission(s)  The CTD² Center at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center utilized an established and operational MCF10A normal breast epithelial cell model to assess the ability of candidate driver aberrations to promote cell grow in anchorage-independent conditions (soft agar assay) and proliferate in the absence of insulin and epidermal growth factor (EGF). This “sensor” cell platform was used to functionally annotate 29 mutations occurring in PIK3CA, which is commonly mutated in breast and other cancer types, including frequent “hotspot” events (e.g., E545K and H1047R) and other mutations occurring less frequently across the cancer patient population. Allelic series construction and cell line production: To efficiently engineer PIK3CA expression vectors, they utilized a high-throughput mutagenesis and molecular barcoding (HiTMMoB) platform that permitted simultaneous completion of site-directed mutagenesis and recombination-based cloning of wild-type and mutant PIK3CA cDNAs into the pLenti6.3 V5/DEST (Life Technologies) lentiviral expression vector.  Lentivirus encoding these alleles was used to stably infect MCF10A cells for entry into anchorage-independent growth and proliferation assays as outlined below. Anchorage-independent growth assays: Soft agar assays were performed on 6-well plates in triplicate for cells transduced with pLenti6.3 V5/DEST-PIK3CA virus encoding individual wild-type or mutant alleles. Cells were selected for 5 days with 5.0 μg/μl blastocidin, and 1 × 104 cells were mixed thoroughly in cell growth medium containing 0.4% SeaKem LE agarose (Fisher Scientific) in RPMI plus 10% FBS, followed by plating onto bottom agarose prepared with 0.65% agarose in RPMI plus 10% FBS. Each well was allowed to solidify and subsequently covered in 1 ml RPMI plus 10% FBS plus P/S, which was refreshed every 4 days. Colonies were stained with 0.05% (wt/vol) iodonitrotetrazolium chloride (Sigma) and scanned at 1200 dpi using a flatbed scanner for colony quantitation. Proliferation assays: Proliferation assays without growth factors (-insulin, -EGF or –insulin alone) were performed on 96-well opaque tissue culture plates. MCF10A cells expressing individual wild-type and mutant PIK3CA alleles were trypsinized and counted. Cells (300 per well) were resuspended in MEGM media (Lonza) with or without growth factors for daily serial time course growth measurements using Cell-Titer-Glo (Promega) following the manufacturer’s recommendations. Values were normalized to Day 0 and then average of all negative controls to calculate fold change at the indicated time points. Ba/F3 IL-less survival assays: Ba/F3 lines were created by cloning PIK3CA variants into pHAGE—DEST-IRES-GFP vector and then infecting Ba/F3 cells by lentiviruses encoding individual wild-type or mutant alleles.  Ba/F3 IL-less survival assays were performed by removing medium after viral infection and culturing cells in low IL3 medium (1:10000 dilution) in duplicates. Cell viability was measured after 7 days using Cell-Titer-Glo (Promega) following the manufacturer’s recommendations. Tumor formation assays: For PIK3CA  variant tumorigenesis competition assays,1X105 cells from each of the HMLER cell lines expressing GFP, PIK3CAWT, eight PIK3CA constructs with silent mutations and twenty rare PIK3CA mutants were pooled and re-suspended in a 1:1 solution of Hank’s balanced salts and Matrigel (BD Bioscience) and then subcutaneously injected into female nude animals (Harlan, Indianapolis, IN). Tumors were collected at the tumor burden limit described in our IACUC-approved animal protocol at Baylor College of Medicine. Then gDNA obtained and barcode regions were PCR amplified using T3 and V5 primers. After PCR product purification, samples were analyzed by IonTorrent PGM sequencing machine. Systematic Functional Annotation of Somatic Mutations in Cancer Principal Investigator
Gordon B. Mills, M.D., Ph.D. ContactPrahlad Ram ReferenceNg et al. (Cancer Cell, 2018) Data Raw/Analyzed Data (.zip file)  The CTD² Center at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center utilized a functional annotation of mutations and fusions found in human cancers using two cell models, Ba/F3 (murine pro-B suspension cells) and MCF10A (human non-tumorigenic mammary epithelial cells). To assess the function of the mutation candidates, two growth-factor-dependent cell models, Ba/F3 and MCF10A cell models, were used. Both cell types stop proliferating and die in the absence of the required factor(s). The rationale is that a “driver” mutation will confer survival and proliferation advantages to the cells in the absence of required growth factor(s), but “passenger” mutations will not. The mutation candidates were put into both cell models with various types of controls. First, two experimental negative controls (GFP, mCherry, or Luciferase) and three experimental positive controls (PIK3CA wild-type, M1043I, and H1047R) with different activities (i.e. wild-type < M1043I < H1047R) served as technical controls to check if the experiments performed well. Second, mutations and their corresponding wild-type counterparts were assessed in parallel in the same experiment, the latter of which determined the basal activity of the genes in the cell models. Third, for selected genes, silent and literature-reported driver mutations were used as additional controls to determine the basal and activated activities of the genes, respectively. In total, 1,049 mutations were tested in batches, with up to 33 mutations per batch. In each experiment (i.e. batch), the set of five experimental controls (two negative and three positive) and corresponding wild-type clones were included. Additional silent and gene-specific positive mutations were also included, if available. For each experiment, pHAGE constructs of mutants and wild-type genes were freshly prepared from a single colony and used for generating lentivirus for Ba/F3 and MCF10A transduction. Lentivirus was generated in the LentiX-293T cells by transfecting the pHAGE and two packaging plasmids (psPAX2 and pMD2.G). The medium of the transfected cells was refreshed at 16 hours post-transfection. The virus was harvested at three days post-transfection by filtering with 0.45 µM filter. Ba/F3 cells (0.6 million cells) were transduced by spinoculation (centrifugal inoculation) at 1000× g for three hours in the presence of polybrene (final concentration: 8 µg/ml). After spinning, cells were resuspended in the Ba/F3 assay medium in a 24-well plate format. For MCF10A cells, 5,000 cells were seeded into 96-well plates one day before transduction and transduced by spinoculation at 906× g for two hours in the presence of polybrene (final concentration: 2.7 µg/ml). The medium was refreshed after spinoculation with the MCF10A assay medium. Transduced cells were incubated at 37°C for three weeks. Cell viability of Ba/F3 and MCF10A cells were measured at four time points (at intervals of three or four days) during the three-week assay period. The functional annotations of mutations were based on a comparison to the corresponding wild-type clones. Informer Drug Library Screening Against Patient-derived PDGFRA Mutations Principal Investigator
Gordon B. Mills, M.D., Ph.D. ContactPrahlad Ram Data Raw/Analyzed Data (.zip file)  The goal is to identify therapeutic liabilities across a spectrum of PDGFRA mutations found in cancer patients. The day before treatment, BaF3 cells stably expressing PDGFRA WT or mutants (1×104 cells/100µL) were seeded in 96-well plates in 5% FBS medium with or without IL-3. To test the drug sensitivity of PDGFRA Y288C in low-serum conditions, BaF3 cells expressing PDGFRA Y288C were seeded at a density of 3×104 cells/100µL in 1% FBS medium with or without IL-3. Cells were treated with DMSO or inhibitors (13 nM to 10 µM) in the presence or absence of IL-3 for 72 hr. Cell viability was determined using CellTiter-Blue at 530-nm excitation and 604-nm emission wavelengths, respectively. Each treatment was performed in triplicate.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: 3-D Projection Electrophoresis - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/key-initiatives/moonshot-cancer-initiative/seminar-series/projection-electrophoresis
txt: 3-D Projection Electrophoresis: Protein Profiling with Single-Cell Resolution
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Surgical Pathology Reports - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/diagnosis-staging/diagnosis/pathology-reports-fact-sheet
txt:  What is a pathology report?  How is tissue obtained for examination by a pathologist?  How does a pathologist examine tissue?  What is the gross description on a surgical pathology report?  What is the microscopic description on a surgical pathology report?  What is the diagnosis on a surgical pathology report?  Are molecular characteristics of a tumor included on a surgical pathology report?  What other information might be included on a surgical pathology report?  How will I find out what's in my surgical pathology report?  Can individuals get a second opinion on their surgical pathology results?  What is a pathology report? How is tissue obtained for examination by a pathologist? How does a pathologist examine tissue? What is the gross description on a surgical pathology report? What is the microscopic description on a surgical pathology report? What is the diagnosis on a surgical pathology report? Are molecular characteristics of a tumor included on a surgical pathology report? What other information might be included on a surgical pathology report? How will I find out what's in my surgical pathology report? Can individuals get a second opinion on their surgical pathology results? What is a pathology report? A pathology report (sometimes called a surgical pathology report) is a medical report that describes the characteristics of a tissue specimen that is taken from a patient. The pathology report is written by a pathologist, a doctor who has special training in identifying diseases by studying cells and tissues under a microscope. A pathology report includes identifying information (such as the patient’s name, birthdate, and biopsy date) and details about where in the body the specimen is from and how it was obtained. It typically includes a gross description (a visual description of the specimen as seen by the naked eye), a microscopic description, and a final diagnosis. It may also include a section for comments by the pathologist. The pathology report provides the definitive cancer diagnosis. It is also used for staging (describing the extent of cancer within the body, especially whether it has spread) and to help plan treatment. Common terms that may appear on a cancer pathology report include: invasive  noninvasive  in situ  carcinoma  benign  neoplasm  malignant  adenocarcinoma  margin  infiltrating  ductal  undifferentiated  well-differentiated  How is tissue obtained for examination by a pathologist? The pathologist examines cells or tissues obtained during a biopsy (which is a procedure to remove a cell or tissue specimen for examination by a pathologist) or surgery or from bodily fluids. A biopsy specimen can be obtained in several ways, such as by taking a tissue sample from the surface of the skin  using a needle inserted through the skin to withdraw tissue or fluid  inserting a thin, lighted tube called an endoscope through the mouth, anus, urethra, or a small incision in the skin to look at areas inside the body and remove a sample using special tools that pass through the tube  If surgery is used to remove part or all of a tumor, some or all of the removed tumor specimen will be examined by the pathologist. If the entire tumor is removed, typically the surgeon will attempt to remove some normal tissue around the tumor (known as the margin) for examination by the pathologist to make sure that it doesn’t contain tumor cells. For some cancer types, especially breast cancer and melanoma, the surgeon may also remove nearby lymph nodes, called the sentinel lymph nodes, so the pathologist can see if these contain cancer cells. The Sentinel Lymph Node Biopsy fact sheet describes this procedure and its use in determining the extent, or stage, of cancer in the body. A pathologist may also examine cells that are present in bodily fluids, such as urine, cerebrospinal fluid (the fluid around the brain and spinal cord), sputum (mucus from the lungs), peritoneal (abdominal cavity) fluid, pleural (chest cavity) fluid, cervical/vaginal smears, and bone marrow. How does a pathologist examine tissue? Tissue or cell specimens must be cut into very thin slices, called sections, so the pathologist can look at them under a microscope. The specimen must be processed to make it solid before it can be cut into sections. The most common approach used for tissue examination involves chemically “fixing” the specimen, usually with a chemical called formalin. This stabilizes the cells for further processing in an automated machine that submerges the tissue in substances that remove water and replace it with molten paraffin wax. Once processed, the tissue is embedded into a permanent paraffin wax block to be cut. The paraffin-embedded tissue is then sliced into very thin sections that are placed onto microscopic slides. The slides are stained with dyes to help visualize parts of the cell and structures in the tissue. This is known as histologic (tissue) examination. Fixed sections provide the maximum detail of the structures in a tissue sample, and they can be saved and analyzed in the future if needed. Preparing fixed sections normally takes several days. The pathologist typically sends a pathology report to the doctor within 10 days after the biopsy or surgery is performed. Frozen sectioning is another approach used by a pathologist for tissue examination. Frozen sections are prepared when an immediate answer about a tissue sample is needed. For example, this type of examination would be used during surgery to provide the surgeon with a rapid diagnosis for an area of abnormal tissue and the extent of the abnormal area while the patient is in the operating room. To make frozen sections, the tissue sample is rapidly frozen, cut into sections using an instrument called a cryostat, stained, and examined by a pathologist. This can be done in about 15 to 20 minutes. Frozen sections are suitable for preparing tissue for some tests, such as immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry. However, the fixed (permanent) section preserves more detail and is more commonly used to make a diagnosis than frozen sections. What is the gross description on a surgical pathology report? The gross description includes the color, weight, and size of a tissue sample as seen by the naked eye. It may also include the shape of the tissue sample and any visible abnormalities. And it will indicate the body site from where the tissue was taken from, how many samples were taken, and whether and how many lymph nodes were removed. What is the microscopic description on a surgical pathology report? The microscopic description in a pathology report includes information about the appearance of the cells after they have been stained with routine stains such as hematoxylin and eosin (also known as H&E) and viewed under the microscope. H&E staining helps identify different types of cells and tissues and provides important information about the pattern and shape of cells and the structure of the tissue. With H&E staining, hematoxylin shows the ribosomes, chromatin (genetic material) within the nucleus, and some other structures in the nucleus as a deep blue-purple color. Eosin shows the cytoplasm, collagen, connective tissue, and other structures that surround and support the cell as an orange-pink-red color. This description may also include the type and number of cells seen in the tissue sample, how abnormal the cells look (also called the tumor grade), and whether there are notable cell features (such as their arrangement and behavior). The microscopic description section will also indicate whether abnormal cells are found in the margins (the edges of the tissue that has been removed by surgery) or in lymph nodes. Margins are described as negative (or “clean”) when the pathologist finds no cancer cells at the edge of the tissue, suggesting that all of the cancer has been removed. A margin is described as positive (or “involved”) when the pathologist finds cancer cells at the edge of the tissue, suggesting that some of the cancer has not been removed. Lymph nodes are called positive if they have cancer cells and negative if they do not. This description may also include the results of additional tests that were performed on the tissue. Depending on the cancer type, these may include tests that measure the properties of cells in a sample, including the number of cells, percentage of live cells, cell size and shape, and the proportion of cells that have a tumor marker on their cell surface. See NCI’s Tumor Markers fact sheet for more information about tumor markers and how they are used in cancer diagnosis and treatment.  investigate genetic or molecular abnormalities in specimens with the use of specific techniques. These include karyotyping, to detect aneuploidy (abnormal numbers of chromosomes) and large translocations (in which long pieces of chromosomes have broken off and moved to other chromosomes), as well as fluorescence in situ hybridization, to detect specific chromosomal deletions or translocations.  What is the diagnosis on a surgical pathology report? The diagnosis section of a pathology report is the pathologist’s summary of all the findings of their visual and microscopic examination of the tissue specimen, in combination with relevant clinical information. It is in this section that the cancer type will be identified, including the tumor grade, lymph node status, margin status, and stage. Are molecular characteristics of a tumor included on a surgical pathology report? Certain molecular tests, sometimes called biomarker tests, are done as part of the initial pathology analysis for all cases of a given cancer type. For example, a pathology report for a patient with suspected breast cancer will include the results of testing for estrogen and progesterone receptors and the protein HER2/neu. The results of these tests can help identify what treatments are best for an individual patient. A liquid biopsy—in which a sample of blood or other body fluid is tested to look for pieces of DNA that have been released from tumor cells—is another way that the molecular characteristics of a tumor may be analyzed. The findings of these additional tests may be provided in separate reports that are linked to the pathology report. Pathology examination is increasingly incorporating analyses of the structure and sequence of DNA extracted from fresh and fixed tissue samples to refine the cancer diagnosis through improved subtyping and stratification of tumor types and to better inform treatment. What other information might be included on a surgical pathology report? In the comments section of the pathology report, the pathologist may note unusual features of the sample, such as information about the cytogenetic and/or molecular characteristics of a tumor, or provide additional information. The comments section is often used by the pathologist to provide more details about the disease and its diagnosis and to recommend additional tests that might be needed. It may include relevant clinical history or test results, abnormal findings that could change a typical diagnosis, previous samples or diagnoses for the patient, and other possible diagnoses. It will also mention tests that are still in process (i.e., pending). How will I find out what's in my surgical pathology report? The doctor in charge of a patient’s treatment will tell the patient about the findings in the pathology report and can help the patient understand the report and what it means for their situation. A patient can also ask to discuss their report with the pathologist. Patients should be aware that pathology report results will often appear in the patient portal at the same time the doctor receives them. This means that patients may see their report before their doctor has had a chance to review it and discuss it with them. Can individuals get a second opinion on their surgical pathology results? Although the diagnosis of most cancers is straightforward, patients or their doctors may want to get a second opinion from another pathologist. Patients interested in getting a second opinion should talk with their doctor. They will need to obtain the slides and/or paraffin block from the pathologist who examined the sample or from the hospital where the biopsy or surgery was done. Many institutions provide second opinions on pathology specimens. NCI-designated cancer centers or academic institutions sometimes provide second opinions. Patients should contact the facility in advance to determine if this service is available, the cost, and shipping instructions. For each patient, the results of all pathology examinations and any other tests ordered by the pathologists are reviewed together by the tumor review board, a group of doctors who are experts in different specialties who plan the treatment approach for a patient.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Carmustine - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/carmustine
txt: This page contains brief information about carmustine
         and a collection of links to more information about the use of 
         this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Carmustine
         is approved 
         to be used alone or with other drugs to treat:  Brain tumors (certain types).  Hodgkin lymphoma. It is used with other drugs in patients whose disease has not gotten better with other treatment or has recurred (come back). Multiple myeloma. It is used with prednisone.  Non-Hodgkin lymphoma. It is used with other drugs in patients whose disease has not gotten better with other treatment or has recurred (come back). Carmustine
         is also being studied in the treatment of other types of
         cancer. Carmustine is also available in a different form called carmustine implant. For more information, see the Drug Information Summary for Carmustine Implant. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Carmustine - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Find Clinical Trials for Carmustine - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Budget and Appropriations Status - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/legislative/current-congress/budget-appropriations
txt: The Fiscal Year 2023 (FY23) Omnibus was signed into law on December 29, 2022. The bill includes $7.3 billion for NCI, representing a $385.6 million increase to the NCI base budget and $216 million for the final year of the Cancer Moonshot℠ funds authorized through the 21st Century Cures Act (an increase of $22 million over the FY22 level, as authorized). The federal government, including the NCI, is operating under a continuing resolution (CR) that provides funding for federal agencies at Fiscal Year (FY) 2023 levels. The CR provides appropriations for NCI through February 2, 2024.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NCI Research Portfolio: Driving Discovery - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/leading-progress/research-portfolio
txt: NCI enables advances against cancer by investing in a broad portfolio of research, supporting the cancer research workforce, and sustaining the infrastructure that enables cutting-edge research to succeed. All these components are essential to lead progress against cancer and accomplish the goals of the National Cancer Plan. NCI’s support of basic, translational, and clinical research is helping patients by driving discovery to improve cancer risk assessment, prevention, detection, diagnosis, treatment, and survivorship. Sustained and robust support for NCI’s work is needed to realize the long-term vision of ending cancer as we know it. Cancer survivors and those at risk of developing the disease rely on the innovative approaches that cancer biology research delivers. Virtually every new cancer diagnostic, therapeutic, or preventive measure begins with a basic science research question. Through decades of carefully planned experiments in laboratories around the world, researchers generate knowledge about cancer. It’s these investments in cancer biology research that support the groundwork needed to discover and advance lifesaving cancer interventions. Continued support is required to build on these findings. NCI is the largest funder of the basic research that is critical for making sustained progress against cancer. Cancer survivors and those at risk of developing the disease rely on the innovative approaches that cancer biology research delivers. For example, through cancer biology research, NCI-supported researchers have: identified rare antitumor immune cells that may one day help advance personalized cancer immunotherapies for patients whose cancers do not respond to standard treatments  revealed unique genetic patterns in tumors from people with lung cancer who never smoked  uncovered vulnerabilities in potentially lethal brain tumors that are notoriously difficult to treat  discovered early molecular changes and immune suppression in precancerous lesions that could help identify people at risk of developing lung cancer  Discoveries like these open the door to new treatment options where few or none currently exist and provide hope that one day all cancers will be treatable. Read more about NCI’s related research areas, including cancer biology research, cancer genomics research, and research on causes of cancer. While overall cancer mortality continues to decrease, researchers estimate that more than half of cancer deaths are preventable. More research investments are needed to learn how to implement, improve, and build on current prevention strategies and intercept cancer more effectively by improving treatment of precancerous lesions. The knowledge gained from cancer prevention research can be used to refine guidelines and implement targeted measures to reduce the incidence of cancer. Researchers have identified several preventable factors in cancer development, such as certain health behaviors, exposure to cancer-causing agents, and social determinants of health. However, there is still much more to learn about how changes in these risk factors influence cancer risk. The knowledge gained from cancer prevention research can be used to refine guidelines and implement targeted measures to reduce the incidence of cancer. For example, NCI-funded researchers are developing experimental vaccines and other medicines to prevent cancers caused by underlying diseases. This research has enabled progress in several areas. NCI-supported studies have: tested vaccines to prevent or delay the onset of hereditary cancers, such as those seen with Lynch syndrome, a condition marked by an 80% chance of developing colon cancer and a significant chance of developing endometrial cancer  found that one dose of human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine is effective in protecting young girls and boys against infections that can cause cervical, anal, and head and neck cancers—reducing the vaccine doses needed and allowing more people to be vaccinated worldwide  discovered a druggable protein target to prevent nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, the biggest contributor to the recent rise in liver cancer cases  Through rigorous scientific studies, researchers can assess the impact of cancer prevention strategies, identify areas for improvement, and develop more efficient and accessible intervention approaches to reduce the burden of cancer. Read more about NCI’s related research areas, including cancer prevention research. Imagine if fewer people suffered and died from cancer because we detected and diagnosed the disease or its precursors at the earliest possible stage. Accurately identifying cancer—and precancerous lesions—and assessing its severity is the primary goal of cancer detection and diagnosis research. Early detection can save lives. An imprecise approach, however, can lead to overdiagnosis, overtreatment, and unnecessary physical, psychological, and financial harm. Investing in cancer detection and diagnosis research can help develop more sensitive, accurate, and cost-effective methods that support targeted cancer therapies and precision medicine. It will also help establish the impact that screening could have on survival rates for more cancer types and clarify any negative outcomes from multi-cancer screening tests currently under investigation. With recent advances in NCI-funded detection and diagnosis technology, scientists have capitalized on novel opportunities. For example, NCI-supported researchers have: developed a blood test that in most people can accurately detect liver cancer, the third leading cause of cancer death worldwide, even in early stages of the disease  developed new artificial intelligence tools to help radiologists improve prostate cancer diagnoses for tumors that are difficult to find during biopsy  combined a specialized form of microscopy imaging with a type of artificial intelligence known as deep learning to expedite brain tumor diagnosis during surgery  Cancer detection and diagnosis research is primed with these emerging technologies. Carefully assessing their impact on cancer outcomes will limit risk and ensure benefit from these new screening and detection methods. Read more about NCI’s related research areas, including cancer screening and early detection research and cancer diagnosis research. Investments in treatment research today will inspire and sustain the safe and effective cures of tomorrow.  For more than 50 years, NCI has played a vital role in the development of more effective and less toxic therapeutic options for patients with cancer. Despite the steady progress in improving treatments, some forms of cancer still lack effective therapies, many cancers eventually develop resistance to treatment, and not all people have equal access to cutting-edge treatments. Adding to these challenges, patients with cancer often experience severe side effects from the disease and its treatment, which for childhood cancer survivors can impact their quality of life for decades. These challenges can be overcome. Investments in treatment research today will inspire and sustain the safe and effective cures of tomorrow. For example, NCI-supported researchers have: developed the first approved drug to treat chronic graft-versus-host disease, a complication of bone marrow transplants in which the donated immune cells attack the recipient’s body, leading to painful and debilitating symptoms  designed a novel type of drug to treat glioblastoma, a highly lethal brain cancer that often develops resistance to current therapies, without harming normal brain cells  conducted clinical research that led to the approval of the first new treatment in over 20 years for Kaposi sarcoma, a form of cancer that mostly affects those who are immunocompromised  completed the OlympiA clinical trial, which led to the approval of a new drug that improves overall survival in people with high-risk BRCA-mutant breast cancer  More research is needed to ensure that all patients with cancer have safe and effective therapies and the highest possible quality of life. Read more about NCI’s related research areas, including cancer treatment research and research on childhood cancers. Each year, cancer has a significant impact on public health, affecting the nation’s economy and the quality of life for millions of people in the United States. NCI invests in studies to identify population-wide trends in cancer and to improve the delivery of cancer interventions. More research is needed to design interventions that improve cancer prevention, screening, treatment, and survivorship outcomes and to address why certain racial, ethnic, and rural populations suffer disproportionately from some cancers. This research can inform policies that reduce cancer-causing exposures, ensure greater compliance with health recommendations, minimize misinformation, and address gaps in the health care system when cancer survivors transition from oncology care to primary care. Investing in cancer control and implementation research will ensure that all people benefit equally from advances in cancer research. Additional investments in cancer control and implementation research will improve the lives of cancer survivors and the general population, while ensuring that all population groups benefit equally from advances in cancer research. For example, NCI-supported researchers have: revealed that physical activity before and during treatment for breast cancer reduces “chemo brain,” a treatment-related cognitive impairment that affects up to 75% of people with breast cancer who receive chemotherapy  developed an effective intervention to increase breast, cervical, and colorectal cancer screenings in women who live in rural locations  completed simulation studies showing that a joint lung cancer screening and smoking cessation intervention would drastically reduce deaths from lung cancer  Researchers are working hard to understand population-level impacts on cancer control and to design and test interventions along the cancer continuum that can address disparities and ensure good health for all people. Read more about NCI’s related research areas, including public health research and cancer and cancer health disparities research. An extensive research infrastructure and a stable, diverse workforce are the backbone of the entire cancer research enterprise, and NCI provides a level and scope of infrastructure and training that cannot be matched by other organizations. Investing in these critical needs is of the greatest importance in leading progress against cancer. All cancer research requires a robust workforce and infrastructure. This includes cancer centers where clinical trials can test new approaches to prevent and treat cancer, facilities that develop and manufacture novel technologies and medicines, electronic databases to support large amounts of biomedical data, and programs and initiatives to train a diverse workforce that drives cancer research forward. These elements need continued investments to remain strong and to capitalize on new opportunities. For example, NCI investments have: funded and continue to support the NCI Cancer Research Data Commons, a cloud-based infrastructure that provides secure access to a large, comprehensive, and expanding collection of cancer research data  delivered research reagents to more than 150 laboratories worldwide as part of the NCI-funded RAS Initiative  launched the Cancer Moonshot Scholars and Early Investigator Advancement Program to grow and diversify the cancer research workforce  supported over 1,400 extramural training awards in the most recent fiscal year, 41% to predoctoral researchers and 59% to postdoctoral researchers and those in early stages of research independence  Investing in the NCI-supported cancer research workforce and infrastructure ensures that all research areas supported by the NCI budget produce the highest quality research in the most effective way possible. Read more about NCI’s cancer research infrastructure and the Center for Cancer Training.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: 2022 NCI Budget Fact Book - Specialized Programs of Research Excellence (SPOREs) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/budget/fact-book/extramural-programs/spores
txt: In 1992, the NCI established the Specialized Programs of Research Excellence (SPORE). The Translational Research Program (TRP) is the home of the SPOREs, a cornerstone of NCI’s efforts to promote collaborative, interdisciplinary translational cancer research. SPORE grants involve both basic and clinical/applied scientists, and support projects that will result in new and diverse approaches to the prevention, early detection, diagnosis and treatment of human cancers. Each SPORE focuses on a specific organ site, such as breast or lung cancer, or on a group of highly related cancers, such as gastrointestinal cancers. SPOREs are designed to enable the rapid and efficient movement of basic scientific findings into clinical settings, as well as to determine the biological basis for observations made in individuals with cancer or in populations at risk for cancer. For more information on organ sites, please visit the Translational Research Program. The NCI Funded Research Portfolio (NFRP) web site contains additional information about the SPORE grants listed below that have been funded by NCI. The NFRP provides access to various NCI budget reports that contain information about research funding according to specific research categories. For more detailed information on these SPORE grants, visit the NCI Funded Research Portfolio (NFRP). Download the Data
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Transformative Educational Advancement and Mentoring Network (TEAM) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/crchd/inp/team
txt: The overarching goal of this R25 program is to support research and educational activities that complement and/or enhance the training of a workforce to meet the nation’s biomedical, behavioral, and clinical research needs. We seek to do this by supporting and providing training navigation and mentorship to support scholars from diverse backgrounds, including individuals from groups known to be underrepresented in the cancer biomedical workforce. To accomplish the overarching stated goal, this FOA supports creative educational activities with a primary focus on: (1) Courses for Skills Development and (2) Mentoring Activities. Resources for Applicants Pre-Application Webinar: Watch the recording and access the slides from the pre-application webinar, held on December 1, 2022.  Frequently Asked Questions  Title & CRCHD Contact Application Due Date & Purpose Transformative Educational Advancement and Mentoring Network (TEAM) (R25 Clinical Trial Not Allowed) Dr. Whitney (Barfield) Steward
			(240) 276-5729 The overarching goal of this R25 program is to support educational activities that complement and/or enhance the training of a workforce to meet the nation’s biomedical, behavioral and clinical research needs. To accomplish the stated over-arching goal, this FOA will support creative educational activities with a primary focus on: Courses for Skills Development  Mentoring Activities  The Transformative Educational Advancement and Mentoring (TEAM) Network will pilot test the use of training champions (TCs) at minority serving institutions (MSIs) (as defined in Section III), to support the development of educational activities and scientific career development programs and promote the diversity of the cancer research workforce. Examples of underrepresented groups are provided in the Notice of NIH's Interest in Diversity, NOT-OD-20-031. The career development levels of focus for this FOA will include predoctoral and postdoctoral fellows, and early-stage investigators (ESIs). TCs are defined as personnel located within the MSI who can assist potential scholars with their plans to apply, attain, or transition to an independent grant award. This RFA will leverage TCs to assist scholars in identifying funding opportunities, networking with appropriate NCI/NIH program directors, and locating resources for competitive application preparation. TCs will also provide additional training support, navigation, and resources to enhance the skills required to successfully identify, prepare, submit, and obtain grants and career development opportunities. This program is not accepting new applications. 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Nilsa Ramirez - Childhood Cancer Researcher - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/childhood/childhood-cancer-data-initiative/stories/nilsa
txt: Pathologist Dr. Nilsa Ramirez sees the benefit in looking at clinical and lab data together to generate more information that could lead to greater discoveries. Director, Biopathology Center, Nationwide Children’s Hospital Biobanking is where everything comes together, says Dr. Nilsa Ramirez (she/her). Information about a patient’s clinical evaluation and laboratory data from their samples are connected and stored—or banked—with the samples in one place. “If you look at clinical and lab data together,” said Nilsa, “you can generate more information that leads to greater discoveries.” Her center houses specimens for several members of NCI’s National Clinical Trials Network and validates CCDI Molecular Characterization Initiative samples. With childhood cancer data, she hopes to see a future where the analysis of even a tiny sample of tissue, such as a tumor biopsy, is maximized. Ultimately, she says, all these data collected can guide pathologists like her in doing more with smaller samples. Outside of the lab, Nilsa reads biographies and when the weather is nice, she can be seen with her husband on his Harley motorcycle.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Sarcoma Study - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/ccg/research/genome-sequencing/tcga/studied-cancers/sarcoma-study
txt: What is sarcoma? The term “sarcoma” encompasses a broad family of rare cancers that can affect soft tissue or bone throughout the body, and sometimes both.1 Sarcoma cases constitute about 15% of all cancers in children, but are much rarer in adults and make up only about 1% of adult cancer cases.2 In 2012, it was estimated that about 11,280 Americans would be diagnosed with soft tissue sarcomas and that approximately one third of those people would not survive. In addition, an estimated 2,890 Americans would be diagnosed with bone sarcomas, with approximately half not expected to survive.1 The exact number of people affected is unknown because sarcoma can be misdiagnosed; the disease is difficult to distinguish from other health problems. There are also often few, if any, symptoms at early stages.1 Additional information on sarcoma. TCGA focused its study on 6 sarcoma subtypes, including 5 with complex karyotypes: dedifferentiated liposarcoma (DDLPS)  leiomyosarcoma (arising in both gynecologic and soft tissue sites) (LMS)  undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS)  myxofibrosarcoma (MFS)  malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST)  and one with simple karyotype: synovial sarcoma (SS)  Sarcoma was part of an effort to characterize rare tumor types. What have TCGA researchers learned about adult soft tissue sarcoma? Few somatic mutations and numerous copy number changes dominate complex karyotype sarcomas, while gene fusions are a defining feature of simple karyotype sarcoma.

TP53, ATRX, and RB1 were among the few genes recurrently mutated across sarcoma types.


Copy number alterations frequently occurred in complex karyotype sarcomas, affecting cell cycle and other pathways.


SS sarcomas expressed fusions in SSX1 or SSX2 genes and frequently also in TERT.


Mutational signatures found in sarcomas are novel, but contain elements of previously described patterns, including those resulting from clock-like mutational processes.  In individual sarcoma types, a wide diversity of genomic and regulomic changes associate with patient outcome.

For DDLPS, JUN amplification associates with worse survival and should be considered as a therapeutic target.


Gynecologic and soft tissue site subtypes of LMS are molecularly distinct enough to support different clinical approaches, but as a whole may benefit from inhibitors of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway.


UPS and MFS are molecularly similar despite histological differences and may be driven by alterations in the Hippo pathway.  The level of immune infiltration associates differentially with patient outcome for different types of sarcoma.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors may be beneficial to certain sarcoma subtypes, such as UPS, MF5, and certain cases of DDPLS.  Few somatic mutations and numerous copy number changes dominate complex karyotype sarcomas, while gene fusions are a defining feature of simple karyotype sarcoma. TP53, ATRX, and RB1 were among the few genes recurrently mutated across sarcoma types.  Copy number alterations frequently occurred in complex karyotype sarcomas, affecting cell cycle and other pathways.  SS sarcomas expressed fusions in SSX1 or SSX2 genes and frequently also in TERT.  Mutational signatures found in sarcomas are novel, but contain elements of previously described patterns, including those resulting from clock-like mutational processes.  TP53, ATRX, and RB1 were among the few genes recurrently mutated across sarcoma types. Copy number alterations frequently occurred in complex karyotype sarcomas, affecting cell cycle and other pathways. SS sarcomas expressed fusions in SSX1 or SSX2 genes and frequently also in TERT. Mutational signatures found in sarcomas are novel, but contain elements of previously described patterns, including those resulting from clock-like mutational processes. In individual sarcoma types, a wide diversity of genomic and regulomic changes associate with patient outcome. For DDLPS, JUN amplification associates with worse survival and should be considered as a therapeutic target.  Gynecologic and soft tissue site subtypes of LMS are molecularly distinct enough to support different clinical approaches, but as a whole may benefit from inhibitors of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway.  UPS and MFS are molecularly similar despite histological differences and may be driven by alterations in the Hippo pathway.  For DDLPS, JUN amplification associates with worse survival and should be considered as a therapeutic target. Gynecologic and soft tissue site subtypes of LMS are molecularly distinct enough to support different clinical approaches, but as a whole may benefit from inhibitors of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway. UPS and MFS are molecularly similar despite histological differences and may be driven by alterations in the Hippo pathway. The level of immune infiltration associates differentially with patient outcome for different types of sarcoma. Immune checkpoint inhibitors may be beneficial to certain sarcoma subtypes, such as UPS, MF5, and certain cases of DDPLS.  Immune checkpoint inhibitors may be beneficial to certain sarcoma subtypes, such as UPS, MF5, and certain cases of DDPLS.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Donna Siegle - Executive Officer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/leadership/donna-siegle-bio
txt: Donna Siegle Deputy Director for Management, Office of Management Executive Officer, NCI Donna Siegle serves as the NCI Executive Officer, responsible for leading the NCI Office of Management (OM), comprised of more than 600 employees.  Ms. Siegle provides executive level management to 21 offices within the NCI Office of the Director and Office of Management. The OM provides a wide range of business and administrative services to more than 3,500 federal employees, and approximately 3,000 Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC) employees and other contract staff.  OM employees work at NCI campuses in Bethesda, Rockville (Shady Grove), and Frederick, Maryland. Prior to serving as NCI Executive Officer, Ms. Siegle served as the Deputy Executive Officer for the NCI OM for 5 years and before that she was an Administrative Resource Center director for the NCI Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics for 12 years. Ms. Siegle has more than 26 years of administrative experience at the NIH, including 24 years with NCI. She has spent years developing and achieving expertise in administrative and business areas while providing guidance to senior program managers and scientific staff on human capital and financial resource management, and leading, managing, and supporting the administrative and scientific NCI programs that support biomedical research. Ms. Siegle is the recipient of two NCI Merit Awards and two NIH Director group awards for her leadership on various administrative and business working groups. She holds a BS degree from the University of Maryland.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: The "Best" Cancer Is the One that Never Happens - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/nca50/stories/screening-and-prevention
txt: Cancer affects millions of people each year, but it doesn’t have to be that way. From clinical trials to major public health campaigns, efforts to understand and communicate about cancer at every level are helping us refine prevention and screening methods, catch cancer sooner (and thus treat it sooner), and, ultimately, save more lives. From left, Drs. Worta McCaskill-Stevens, David Sidransky, and Susan Magasi. Codesigner of and participant in TMIST, an important breast cancer screening clinical trial Practice what you preach. That’s exactly what Dr. Worta McCaskill-Stevens is doing by participating in the NCI-sponsored Tomosynthesis Mammographic Imaging Screening Trial (TMIST). The clinical trial, which she codesigned, is comparing 3-D and 2-D mammography to determine which is better for breast cancer screening. To Dr. McCaskill-Stevens, it’s a chance for all women, including herself, to take a more active role in thinking about their own screening and the implications of which technology to use. A clinician-turned-researcher and director of the NCI Community Oncology Research Program (NCORP), Dr. McCaskill-Stevens found it difficult to leave direct clinical care but believes that research and clinical trials like TMIST can have a major impact on patients nationwide. Her work in breast cancer and with community-based clinical trials have won her many awards, including being named to EBONY magazine’s 2013 Power 100 list of the nation’s most influential African Americans in health and science. Performed pioneering research in using biomarkers to improve early detection of cancer Examining stool samples—that’s the unpopular job Dr. David Sidransky took when he began researching biomarkers for early cancer detection. Motivated to make a difference and help people find cancer early, he went on to lead research detecting genetic mutations in bodily fluids like stool, urine, and blood. It began a revolution in cancer diagnosis, enabling the opportunity to use bodily fluids to detect some cancers before people develop symptoms. These early findings led to more discoveries, and in 2001, his award-winning work landed him in TIME magazine as one of the top physicians and scientists in the United States. Currently, Dr. Sidransky is focused on finding genetic changes in smoking-associated tumors. With an eye toward the future, he hopes there will eventually be a blood test available that can earlier detect most of the common cancers. Reducing barriers to cancer screening for women with disabilities Women with disabilities are 22% less likely to be screened for breast cancer. Wanting to learn why, Dr. Susan Magasi found barriers like mammography machines that don’t adjust to the bodies of women with physical disabilities and a lack of provider knowledge around supporting people with disabilities. Determined to expand screening access, Dr. Magasi created ScreenABLE Saturday, an annual wellness fair featuring free, accessible mammograms and activities for women with disabilities like adaptive yoga, healthy cooking demos, manicures, and more. She hopes that ScreenABLE Saturday becomes a model for creating inclusive health care spaces. Eager to ensure a future where all people can easily access cancer screenings and care, Dr. Magasi also partnered with people with disabilities to develop evidence-based educational films for providers, as well as apps that connect cancer survivors with disabilities to one another and empower them to proactively manage any long-term effects of cancer and its treatment. From left, Kathy Crosby and Dr. Eduardo Vilar-Sanchez (Photo courtesy of MD Anderson Cancer Center) Led multiple, award-winning tobacco cessation marketing and communications campaigns Decades ago, the ad industry glamorized and popularized cigarettes and tobacco use. Now, Kathy Crosby is working to turn that around, harnessing the power of advertising in multiple public health campaigns like the “The Real Cost” (FDA’s first-ever national youth tobacco prevention effort) to convince teens to stop smoking or prevent them from ever starting. Smoking increases the risk of many cancers like lung, head and neck, and bladder cancer. Crosby and her team analyzed what teenagers care about most and combined that with persuasive advertising to prevent nearly 600,000 teenagers from ever smoking in just the first two years of the campaign. That translates to fewer addicted adults, $53 billion saved in future medical costs, and fewer smoking-related cancer diagnoses. Emphasizing a powerful but empathetic marketing approach, Crosby is using the art and science of behavior-change advertising and decades of experience to make a significant impact on public health. Developing a new potential cancer vaccine currently beginning human clinical trials A new cancer prevention vaccine could be on the horizon, and Dr. Eduardo Vilar-Sanchez is leading the team developing it. The vaccine is for people with Lynch syndrome—a hereditary condition that greatly increases someone’s risk of colorectal and other cancers and often affects multiple family members. The vaccine works by training the immune system to attack cells that contain specific cancer-associated proteins. Dr. Vilar-Sanchez, who has cared for patients with Lynch syndrome his entire career, has been frustrated by the few cancer prevention options available to families. His patients’ stories motivate him and he’s excited for this vaccine’s potential to truly help an entire family. Soon, the vaccine will be tested in clinical trials, but Dr. Vilar-Sanchez is hopeful, not just for his patients, but for the potential of his work to lead to vaccines for other cancer syndromes. The National Cancer Act of 1971 opened the door to breakthroughs in cancer screening, prevention, and early detection. Find out more about the act. Screenings, vaccinations, and precision medicine are all making a difference in cancer prevention. Listen to Healthcast’s National Cancer Act podcast series to learn more.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Phil Daschner, Ph.D. - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/about/contact/phil-daschner
txt: Dr. Phil Daschner has expertise in cancer etiology, biological carcinogenesis, the microbiome, and the role of diet/nutrition/obesity in cancer. He manages a portfolio of grants focusing on biological carcinogenesis, which includes viruses, bacteria, and the microbiome. Along with his DCB responsibilities, he also has leadership roles with the trans-NIH Microbiome Working Group (TMWG) and the NCI Microbiome Working Group. Dr. Daschner is also a member of the NCI Cancer Disparities Committee (CDAC) and the trans-NCI Obesity & Cancer Work Group. He is excited about the new evolution of bioinformatic tools to analyze DNA and RNA sequence data. He states “The exciting part of this type of research is determining the systemic effects of the microbiome, applying that knowledge, and translating it to clinical use.”  Research Programs Dr. Daschner also helps manage NCI research programs: Mechanisms that Impact Cancer Risk after Bariatric Surgery  Metabolic Dysregulation and Cancer Risk Program  Modulating Human Microbiome Function to Enhance Immune Responses Against Cancer  Microbial-based Cancer Imaging and Therapy - Bugs as Drugs   Background Before coming to DCB, Phil worked in the NCI Intramural Laboratory of Nutritional and Molecular Regulation. This lab was primarily interested in isolating specific natural compounds that were chemopreventive. He also has a background in microbial genetics and drug discovery from natural products, including the initial purification and testing of bryostatin, as well as the identification of curcumin and resveratrol as natural ligands of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor.  Education M.S., Microbiology, Arizona State University  
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Cancers Associated with Drinking Alcohol - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/alcohol/alcohol-related-cancers-infographic
txt: 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Melphalan - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/melphalan
txt: This page contains brief information about melphalan
         and a collection of links to more information about the use of 
         this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Melphalan
         is approved for palliative treatment of:  Multiple myeloma.  Ovarian epithelial cancer that cannot be removed by surgery.  Melphalan
         is also being studied in the treatment of other types of
         cancer. Melphalan is also available in an injectable form for patients who cannot take melphalan by mouth. For more information, see the Drug Information Summary for Melphalan Hydrochloride. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Melphalan - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Find Clinical Trials for Melphalan - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Computed Tomography (CT) Scans and Cancer Fact Sheet - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/diagnosis-staging/ct-scans-fact-sheet
txt:  What is computed tomography?  What can a person expect during a CT procedure?  How is CT used in cancer screening?  What is total-body, or whole-body, CT?  What is combined PET/CT?  Is the radiation from CT harmful?  What are the risks of CT scans for children?  What is being done to reduce the level of radiation exposure from CT?  What is NCI doing to improve CT imaging?  Where can people get more information about CT?  What is computed tomography? What can a person expect during a CT procedure? How is CT used in cancer screening? What is total-body, or whole-body, CT? What is combined PET/CT? Is the radiation from CT harmful? What are the risks of CT scans for children? What is being done to reduce the level of radiation exposure from CT? What is NCI doing to improve CT imaging? Where can people get more information about CT? What is computed tomography? Computed tomography (CT) is a noninvasive imaging procedure that uses special x-ray equipment to create detailed pictures, or scans, of areas inside the body. Each picture created during a CT procedure shows the organs, bones, and other tissues in a thin “slice” of the body. The entire series of pictures produced in CT is like a loaf of sliced bread—you can look at each slice individually (2-dimensional pictures), or you can look at the whole loaf (a 3-dimensional picture). Computer programs are used to create both types of pictures. Modern CT machines take continuous pictures in a helical (or spiral) fashion rather than taking a series of pictures of individual slices of the body, as the original CT machines did. Helical CT (also called spiral CT) has several advantages over older CT techniques: it is faster and produces better quality 3-D pictures of areas inside the body, which may improve detection of small abnormalities. CT has many uses in the diagnosis, treatment, and monitoring of cancer, including screening for cancer  helping diagnose the presence of a tumor  providing information about the stage of a cancer  determining exactly where to perform (i.e., guide) a biopsy procedure  guiding certain local treatments, such as cryotherapy, radiofrequency ablation, and the implantation of radioactive seeds for brachytherapy  helping plan external-beam radiation therapy or surgery  determining whether a cancer is responding to treatment  detecting recurrence of a tumor  In addition, CT is widely used to help diagnose circulatory (blood) system diseases and conditions, such as coronary artery disease (atherosclerosis), blood vessel aneurysms, and blood clots; spinal conditions; kidney and bladder stones; abscesses; inflammatory diseases, such as ulcerative colitis and sinusitis; and injuries to the head, skeletal system, and internal organs. CT imaging is also used to detect trauma, brain bleeds, and abnormal brain function or deposits in adult patients with cognitive impairment who are being evaluated for Alzheimer’s disease and other causes of cognitive decline. What can a person expect during a CT procedure? During a CT procedure, the person lies very still on a table, and the table passes slowly through the center of a large donut-shaped x-ray machine. The person might hear whirring sounds during the procedure. At times during a CT procedure, the person may be asked to hold their breath to prevent blurring of the images. Sometimes, people having CT are given a contrast (imaging) agent, or dye, before the procedure. The contrast dye highlights specific areas inside the body, resulting in clearer pictures. The dye may be given by mouth, injected into a vein, or given by enema. Iodine and barium are two dyes commonly used in CT. In very rare cases, the contrast agents used in CT can cause allergic reactions. Some people experience mild itching or hives (small bumps on the skin). Symptoms of a more serious allergic reaction include shortness of breath and swelling of the throat or other parts of the body. People should tell the technologist immediately if they experience any of these symptoms so they can be treated promptly. Very rarely, the contrast agents used in CT can cause kidney problems for certain patients, such as those with impaired kidney function. Kidney function can be checked with a simple blood test before the contrast agent is injected. CT is a noninvasive procedure and does not cause any pain. However, lying in one position during the procedure may be slightly uncomfortable. The length of a CT procedure depends on the size of the area being scanned, but it usually lasts only a few minutes to half an hour. For most people, CT is performed on an outpatient basis at a hospital or a radiology center, without an overnight hospital stay. Some people are concerned about experiencing claustrophobia during a CT procedure. However, most CT scanners surround only portions of the body, not the whole body. Therefore, people are not enclosed in a machine and are unlikely to feel claustrophobic. People should let their health care provider and the technologist know if there is any possibility that they are pregnant. Depending on the part of the body to be scanned, the provider may reduce the radiation dose or use an alternative imaging method. However, the level of radiation exposure in a CT scan is believed to be too low to harm a growing fetus.   Patient undergoing CT of the abdomen. Drawing shows the patient on a table that slides through the CT machine, which takes x-ray pictures of the inside of the body. How is CT used in cancer screening? CT is used in both colorectal cancer screening (including screening for large polyps) and lung cancer screening. Colorectal cancer A procedure called CT colonography (also known as virtual colonoscopy) can be used to screen for both large colorectal polyps and colorectal tumors. Virtual colonoscopy is the use of CT to produce a series of pictures of the colon and the rectum from outside the body instead of using a colonoscope to view the inside of the colon and rectum. The effective dose to the patient from a CT colonography procedure is similar to that of a standard CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis, which is about 6 millisieverts (mSv) (1). (By comparison, the estimated average annual dose received from natural sources of radiation is about 3 mSv.) Although CT colonography is effective for visualizing tumors and adenomas, it has potential downsides. One is that if polyps or other abnormal growths are found during a virtual colonoscopy, a standard colonoscopy is needed to remove them. Also, CT colonography can lead to the unintentional discovery of medical findings in areas outside the colon and rectum that require additional follow-up procedures to rule out the unlikely possibility that these findings indicate real problems. Lung cancer Low-dose CT of the lungs is used to screen for lung cancer in adults who are increased risk because of their smoking history. The risk of lung cancer in those who have never smoked tobacco products is generally so low that they would be unlikely to benefit from lung cancer screening. The U. S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends annual lung cancer screening with low-dose CT for people ages 50 to 80 years who have a 20 pack-year or more smoking history (which they could have if, for example, they smoked one pack of cigarettes per day for 20 years or two packs of cigarettes per day for 10 years) and either currently smoke or quit smoking within the last 15 years (2). The estimated effective dose of radiation in a low-dose lung CT scan is 1.5 mSv (1). The National Lung Screening Trial (NLST) demonstrated that three annual low-dose CT screens for lung cancer reduced lung-cancer mortality by 20% (3). However, there are potential harms as well as benefits. For example, people screened with low-dose lung CT can have false-positive results (that is, findings that appear to be abnormal even though no cancer is present), which need monitoring and may necessitate invasive procedures to rule out cancer. Overdiagnosis—finding and treating a cancer that would not have caused problems during someone’s lifetime—is also a possibility, although there is little, if any, evidence of overdiagnosis after extended follow-up of the NLST (4). Also, because low-dose lung CT can produce images of organs and tissues outside the lung, it is possible that abnormalities outside of the lungs, such as renal or thyroid masses, may be found. As with extracolonic findings from CT colonography, some such findings will be serious, but many will not. NCI’s Patient and Physician Guide: National Lung Screening Trial provides more information on the benefits and harms of CT screening for lung cancer. What is total-body, or whole-body, CT? Total-body, or whole-body, CT creates pictures of nearly every area of the body—from the chin to below the hips. This procedure, which is used routinely in patients who already have cancer, can also be used in people who do not have any symptoms of disease. However, whole-body CT has not been shown to be an effective screening method for healthy people. Most abnormal findings from this procedure do not indicate a serious health problem, but the tests that must be done to follow up and rule out a problem can be expensive, inconvenient, and uncomfortable. Also, they may expose the patient to extra risks, such as from an invasive procedure like a biopsy that may be needed to evaluate the findings. In addition, whole-body CT can expose people to relatively large amounts of ionizing radiation—an effective dose of about 10 to 20 mSv, or more than three times the estimated average annual dose received from natural sources of radiation. Most doctors recommend against whole-body CT for people without any signs or symptoms of disease. What is combined PET/CT? Combined PET/CT uses two imaging methods, CT and positron emission tomography (PET), in one procedure. CT is done first to create anatomic pictures of the organs and structures in the body, and then PET is done to create pictures that provide functional data about the metabolic pathways (chemical reactions that take place in a cell to create and use energy) that are active in tissues or cells. Cancer cells often use different metabolic pathways than normal cells. Patients undergoing a PET/CT procedure are administered a positron-emitting (radioactive) substance, or radiopharmaceutical, that is designed to target cancer cells specifically. Numerous radiopharmaceuticals have been developed. However, the most common PET procedure uses an imaging agent called FDG (a radioactive form of the sugar glucose). Because cancerous tumors usually metabolize glucose more rapidly than normal tissues, they take up more FDG and appear different from other tissues on a PET scan. Other PET imaging agents can provide information about the level of oxygen in a particular tissue, the formation of new blood vessels, the presence of bone growth, whether tumor cells are actively dividing and growing, and whether cancer may have spread. For example, two prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA)–targeted imaging drugs with attached radioactive tracers—piflufolastat F-18 (Pylarify) and Ga-68 gozetotide (Locametz)—are used for PET/CT imaging of PSMA-positive lesions in men with suspected prostate cancer metastases. The estimated effective dose from a PSMA PET procedure is 3 mSv (5). Combining CT and PET may provide a more complete picture of a tumor’s location and growth or spread than either test alone. The combined procedure may improve the ability to diagnose cancer, to determine how far a tumor has spread, to plan treatment, and to monitor response to treatment. Combined PET/CT may also reduce the number of additional imaging tests and other procedures a patient may need. The effective dose from a whole-body combined PSMA PET/CT procedure can range from 4 to 23 mSv depending on the specifics of the imaging protocol (1, 6). Is the radiation from CT harmful? Some people may be concerned about the amount of radiation they receive during CT. CT imaging involves the use of x-rays, which are a form of ionizing radiation. Exposure to ionizing radiation is known to increase the risk of cancer. Standard x-ray procedures, such as routine chest x-rays and mammography, use relatively low levels of ionizing radiation. The radiation exposure from CT is higher than that from standard x-ray procedures, but the increase in cancer risk from one CT scan is still small. The benefits of a CT scan, especially if it is being used to diagnose cancer or another serious condition in someone who has signs or symptoms of disease, greatly outweigh any potential health risks. It is also important to note that everyone is exposed to some background level of naturally occurring ionizing radiation every day. The average person in the United States receives an estimated effective dose of about 3 millisieverts (mSv) per year from naturally occurring radioactive materials, such as radon and radiation from outer space (1). By comparison, the radiation exposure from one low-dose CT scan of the chest (1.5 mSv) is comparable to 6 months of natural background radiation, and a typical CT scan of the chest (6.1 mSv) is comparable to 2 years of natural background radiation (1). The widespread use of CT and other procedures that use ionizing radiation to create images of the body has raised concerns that even small increases in cancer risk could lead to large numbers of future cancers (7, 8). Women are at a somewhat higher risk than men of developing cancer after receiving the same radiation exposures at the same ages (9). People considering CT should talk with their doctors about whether the procedure is necessary for them and about its risks and benefits. Some organizations recommend that people keep a record of the imaging examinations they have received in case their doctors don’t have access to all of their health records. A sample form, called My Medical Imaging History, was developed by the Radiological Society of North America, the American College of Radiology, and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. It includes questions to ask the doctor before undergoing any x-ray exam or treatment procedure. What are the risks of CT scans for children? Radiation exposure from CT scans affects adults and children differently. Children are more sensitive to radiation than adults because of their growing bodies and the rapid pace at which the cells in their bodies divide. In addition, because children have potentially many more years of life ahead of them than adults, there is a greater opportunity for them to develop radiation-related cancers (10). In a large multinational study, individuals who had at least one CT scan before the age of 22 were found to have an increased risk of developing hematological cancers, particularly lymphoid and myeloid cancers and acute leukemia (11). In the 12 years after a single CT scan, the risk of cancer was about 1–2 cases for every 10,000 scans performed on children and young people. In talking with health care providers, three key questions that parents can ask are: Why is the test needed?  Will the results change the treatment decisions?  Is there an alternative test that doesn’t involve radiation?  If the test is clinically justified, then the parents can be reassured that the benefits will outweigh the small long-term risks. What is being done to reduce the level of radiation exposure from CT? In response to concerns about the increased risk of cancer associated with CT and other imaging procedures that use ionizing radiation, several organizations and government agencies have developed guidelines and recommendations regarding the appropriate use of these procedures. The Image Gently campaign seeks to raise awareness about methods to reduce radiation doses during pediatric medical imaging examinations.  The Image Wisely campaign aims to lower the amount of radiation used in medically necessary imaging studies and eliminating unnecessary procedures.  The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)’s Initiative to Reduce Unnecessary Radiation Exposure from Medical Imaging focuses on the safe use of medical imaging devices, informed decision-making about when to use specific imaging procedures, and increasing patients’ awareness of their radiation exposure.  The NIH Clinical Center requires that radiation dose exposures from CT and other imaging procedures be included in the electronic medical records of patients treated at the center (12). In addition, all imaging equipment purchased by NIH must provide data on exposure in a form that can be tracked and reported electronically. This patient protection policy is being adopted by other hospitals and imaging facilities.  NCI’s guide for health care providers, Radiation Risks and Pediatric Computed Tomography (CT): A Guide for Health Care Providers, addresses the value of CT as a diagnostic tool in children, unique considerations for radiation exposure in children, risks to children from radiation exposure, and measures to minimize exposure.  The American College of Radiology (ACR) has developed the ACR Appropriateness Criteria®, evidence-based guidelines to help providers make appropriate imaging and treatment decisions for a number of clinical conditions.  ACR has also established the Dose Index Registry, which collects anonymized information related to dose indices for all CT exams at participating facilities.  CT scanner manufacturers are developing newer detector systems and image reconstruction algorithms that can provide higher quality images at much lower radiation doses.  What is NCI doing to improve CT imaging? Researchers funded by NCI are studying ways to improve the use of CT in cancer screening, diagnosis, and treatment. NCI also conducts and sponsors clinical trials that are testing ways to improve CT or new uses of CT imaging technology. Some of these clinical trials are run by the ECOG-ACRIN Cancer Research Group, one of the groups in NCI’s National Clinical Trials Network. NCI’s Cancer Imaging Program (CIP), part of the Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis (DCTD), funds cancer-related basic, translational, and clinical research in imaging sciences and technology. CIP supports the development of novel imaging agents for CT and other types of imaging procedures to help doctors better locate cancer cells in the body. In addition, CIP maintains the Cancer Imaging Archive, which is a library of medical images of cancer, including low-dose CT images, that are accessible for public download. This library has been used extensively by outside researchers in developing computer-aided diagnosis to help radiologists interpret CT images, for example, in lung cancer screening. Where can people get more information about CT? Additional information about CT imaging is available from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the federal agency that regulates food, drugs, medical devices, cosmetics, biologics, and radiation-emitting products. Information about diagnostic radiology, including CT imaging, is also available at RadiologyInfo.org, the public information website of the Radiological Society of North America and the American College of Radiology.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NCI K05 Award - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/grants-training/training/funding/k05
txt: Please note: NCI no longer accepts applications for the K05. The Funding Opportunity Announcement expired on January 8, 2015, and will not be reissued. The NCI Established Investigator Award in Cancer Prevention and Control (K05) provides established investigators protected time to: Conduct research in cancer prevention, control, behavioral sciences and population sciences, and  Mentor junior investigators.  For more complete information, reference the Program Announcement and/or contact the program staff. At the time of the award, the candidate must be: a citizen of the United States,  or a noncitizen national,  or must have been lawfully admitted for permanent residence and possess an Alien Registration Receipt Card (1-151 or 1-551) or some other verification of legal admission as a permanent resident.  Citizenship or green card is not needed to apply. Citizenship or green card is needed at the time of award issuance. The candidate must be the Principal Investigator (PI) of an R01, or R01-like, peer-reviewed cancer-focused research grant at the time of application and during the award to be eligible for the K05 Award. For the NCI K05, R01-like research funding includes peer-reviewed research grants from other federal sources and private foundations. The award duration must be for at least 3 years with a minimum of $150,000 direct costs per year. Grants under a no-cost extension do not qualify. The PI is expected to maintain such research grant support during the K05 project period. If the awardee loses peer-reviewed independent research support during the K05 Award period, the awardee must document efforts to replace this support and demonstrate that he or she continues to meet all other requirements of the K05 Award. K05 applications are no longer accepted. Find an overview of the grant process Program Announcement  Current List of K05 Awards  Link to Main Peer Review Group NCI-J  Notices
Changes to Public Access Policy Compliance Efforts
Notice of Salary Limitation on Grants, Cooperative Agreements, and Contracts  Changes to Public Access Policy Compliance Efforts  Notice of Salary Limitation on Grants, Cooperative Agreements, and Contracts  For additional information regarding policies and/or guidance in preparing an application for the K05 Award, contact: Dr. Susan N. Perkins Program Director Email: perkinsu@mail.nih.gov  Branch Phone: 240-276-5630  For information regarding fiscal and/or budget issues, contact: Grants Administration Branch Marianne Galczynski Email: marianne.galczynski@nih.gov Phone: 240-276-6291  For information regarding review issues, contact: Referral Officer Division of Extramural Activities Phone: 240-276-5588 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Contact NCI-CONNECT - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/rare-brain-spine-tumor/about/contact-us
txt: NCI-CONNECT is headquartered on the NIH campus in Bethesda, Maryland. Do you have questions about rare brain or spine tumors? Contact us at NCICONNECT@mail.nih.gov or call 240-760-6530. Receive the latest news in adult rare central nervous system (CNS) cancer research, care, and treatment. Subscribe to our NCI-CONNNECTions newsletter  View NCI-CONNECTions: A Rare Brain and Spine Tumor Blog  Follow us at @NIHBrainTumor on X (formerly Twitter) and check out the #NCIconnect hashtag to view posts from our greater community  View our Brain and Spine Tumor Care video playlist  Subscribe to our NCI-CONNNECTions newsletter View NCI-CONNECTions: A Rare Brain and Spine Tumor Blog Follow us at @NIHBrainTumor on X (formerly Twitter) and check out the #NCIconnect hashtag to view posts from our greater community View our Brain and Spine Tumor Care video playlist Join our closed Facebook group, NCI-CONNECT Community, to connect with other patients and caregivers.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Past CCDI Symposiums - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/childhood/childhood-cancer-data-initiative/events-webinars/past-symposiums
txt: The Childhood Cancer Data Initiative (CCDI) Symposium brings together people from across the childhood cancer community to discuss CCDI progress and community priorities. Revisit previous symposium recordings and summaries. Please contact CCDIevents@mail.nih.gov if you have difficulty downloading or viewing symposium slides.  2023 Symposium  2021 Symposium  2019 Symposium  2023 Symposium 2021 Symposium 2019 Symposium 2023 Symposium On March 24, 2023, NCI hosted the Childhood Cancer Data Initiative (CCDI) Annual Symposium. More than 800 researchers, clinicians, survivors, and advocates from the community gathered to discuss how enhanced data connection and sharing can address current issues and possibilities in childhood cancer research. Dialogue between speakers and attendees, both virtual and in-person, reviewed CCDI’s accomplishments and identified challenges and priorities that lie ahead. Access the event presentation and event recording. CCDI Scientific Director Dr. Gregory Reaman opened the symposium by welcoming all virtual and in-person attendees and encouraging their engagement and input. Speaking on behalf of NCI Director Dr. Monica Bertagnolli, he shared her belief that CCDI demonstrates the potential power of data-sharing and collaboration to transform research and care not only for childhood cancer but for all people with cancer. Dr. Jaime Guidry Auvil, director of NCI’s Office of Data Sharing, and Hanna Jorgenson, a childhood cancer survivor, delivered joint keynote addresses that provided both a researcher and patient perspective. Dr. Guidry Auvil explained the power of data sharing and how, when data are made available to a range of experts, isolated data points can become collective knowledge that propels childhood cancer research forward and improves outcomes for children, adolescents, and young adults (AYAs) with cancer. Hanna Jorgenson discussed her osteosarcoma treatment and the long-term effects it had on her appearance and life. A decade later, at her final oncology check-up, her doctor mentioned that, because she also had an adrenal tumor in childhood, she should be tested for Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Just when Hanna thought her cancer journey had ended, the test came back positive. She has used this knowledge to be proactive about her health, and her story demonstrates how widespread knowledge and data sharing among researchers, doctors, and patients can empower survivors and ensure that doctors provide the appropriate long-term care to patients. Speakers summarized key areas of CCDI’s progress, including: The Molecular Characterization Initiative, which in its first year enrolled more than 1,000 children and AYAs newly diagnosed with brain tumors, soft tissue sarcomas, or rare cancers.  The CCDI Data Ecosystem, which also includes platforms and tools that researchers, doctors, and patients can use to access and explore childhood cancer data. Tools include the Childhood Cancer Data Catalog, National Childhood Cancer Registry and NCCR*Explorer, and Molecular Targets Platform.  The CCDI Hub, where users can access the Data Ecosystem.  The CCDI Participant Index, which, once available, will help researchers study cohorts by linking patient data from many institutions to a single ID that will be easily searchable, enhance interoperability of data, and preserve patient privacy.  A National Initiative for Rare Cancers in Children and AYAs, which is in the early stages of development. The proposal includes plans for a rare pediatric cancer registry, designs for observational and interventional studies, participant recruitment, national tumor boards, and collaborative rare tumor clinics for patients and families.  The symposium focused on three areas of opportunity for CCDI: cohorts for clinical and translational research  clinical data and annotation  accelerating clinical trials in childhood cancer  Studying childhood cancer involves significant challenges, including issues with collecting patient-reported outcomes and precise treatment and care data. Because childhood cancers are rare, longitudinal observation trials must enroll smaller groups—or cohorts—of children and AYAs with different types of cancers. Well-designed cohort studies could provide strong and reliable data to inform policy and, ultimately, decisions affecting patient health. Speakers agreed that national and international collaboration among childhood cancer research and care institutions to create focused cohorts is crucial for gathering as much data as possible on these rare diseases. The CCDI Molecular Characterization Initiative can play a role in collecting data that will be indispensable for organizing cohorts and learning more about soft tissue sarcomas, brain tumors, neuroblastoma, and extremely rare cancers in children and AYAs. Another critical tool for building cohorts is the forthcoming CCDI Participant Index. With individual patient data from various institutions linked to a single ID, researchers will be able to study the natural history, outcomes, and long-term effects of childhood cancer and its treatments. To learn from every child and AYA with cancer, data must be collected and recorded in a way that can be easily understood, searchable, and extracted by many different users; however, no standards currently exist for annotating clinical data from electronic health records (EHRs). Standardizing EHR data and using them to track treatments and outcomes can help create a clear picture of a person’s entire cancer experience. Extracting clinical data from EHRs can provide researchers with real-world datasets for understanding how a certain course of treatment affects outcomes. Speakers agreed that standards for accurately collecting relevant data and extracting both structured and unstructured data from EHRs will be critical for making use of this valuable tool. They also discussed the possibilities and challenges of automated EHR data extraction using pilot programs such as ExtractEHR. Before people with cancer can share their data with researchers or participate in clinical trials, they must provide consent. Consent can be a barrier to data sharing. It often happens at diagnosis, an already difficult time for parents of children with cancer, and language in consent forms can be hard to understand. In addition, consents are distributed across various institutions where the patient receives care and are associated with numerous clinical trials and biological studies. As such, researchers may not have easy access to all consents. Speakers brought to light the need for “computable consent,” where patient privacy is assured and data sharing preferences for clinical and research purposes are electronically recorded and machine-readable for easy search and access by researchers and doctors. They also discussed projects working toward more transparency and engagement in the consent process, such as the Alliance Participant Engagement Portal and the ONC LEAP Computable Consent Project. Because childhood cancer is rare, clinical trials can take years to enroll a small number of patients, and participants often must meet strict criteria to be accepted for a trial. Drug approvals based on results can take many additional years, time that children with cancer don’t have. Speakers addressed possibilities for speeding up clinical trials and drug development for children with cancer. These included well-designed externally controlled trials; trials using real-world data and real-world evidence; and decentralized, global enrollment onto trials. Panelists agreed that the current model for clinical trials must be adjusted to more efficiently investigate childhood cancer and assure timely access to safe and effective cancer drugs. Following the symposium, six virtual breakout sessions were held in person on March 25, and virtually on March 28–30, 2023, to discuss topics raised at the main symposium event. See below for presentations and recordings from the virtual sessions. Each presentation also includes a summary of the corresponding in-person session. Molecular Characterization Initiative and the potential for future cohort studiesPresentation • Recording  Patient and family perspectives on computable consent and CCDI Participant IndexPresentation • Recording  Electronic health record data extraction: current status and continuing challengesPresentation • Recording  External controls for pediatric cancer clinical trialsPresentation • Recording  Collaborations and transformative research opportunities using data available through the CCDI ecosystemPresentation • Recording  Observational studies and novel interventional approaches for rare pediatric cancers Presentation • Recording  2021 Symposium NCI hosted the CCDI Symposium on November 9, 2021. Thirty-one expert speakers representing the childhood cancer research, care, and advocacy communities shared CCDI’s recent progress, identified next steps and priorities for the initiative, and listened to patients and advocates describe their needs and issues. Access the recording. Then NCI Director Dr. Norman Sharpless opened the symposium with optimistic yet grounded remarks on the current state of childhood, adolescent, and young adult cancers, expressing hope that CCDI will contribute to progress in research and treatment. He shared his view that we are in a golden age in cancer research fueled by large amounts of data generated in the clinic and the lab. Challenges and barriers remain in collecting these data from every child diagnosed with cancer. CCDI aims to address some of these challenges to lead to new discoveries and decrease the burden of cancer for individuals, their families, and communities. Naomi Bartley, an advocate, informaticist, and childhood cancer survivor, provided the keynote talk and graciously shared her story. She discussed her treatment, its ramifications, the impact cancer had on her life as well as her daughter’s, and the importance of the work being done under CCDI. Her perspective provided an important reminder of the long-lasting effects childhood cancer can have on families. Speakers gave an overview of CCDI’s goals and successes to date. A key objective for CCDI is the development of a federated infrastructure to help manage and share data, including a searchable catalog of childhood cancer data, tools, and resources. Progress was evident as researchers presented their efforts in improving data sharing, collection, and analysis. The symposium focused on three areas crucial to the success of CCDI and how we can learn from every child, adolescent, and young adult (AYA) with cancer. NCI Acting Director Douglas Lowy, M.D., speaking at the Childhood Cancer Data Initiative Symposium in Washington, DC. Understanding the molecular characteristics of childhood cancers is vital for advancing precision care. Sequencing the genomics of every child’s cancer will enhance the current knowledge base on existing variants. To learn from every child with cancer, NCI established the Molecular Characterization Initiative, built on the Children’s Oncology Group’s Project:EveryChild, to perform molecular characterization on children and AYAs at diagnosis and provide information back to the child’s family and clinicians to help with treatment decisions.  OncoKB, the first FDA-recognized database of cancer variants was created.  Texas KidsCanSeq and Pediatric MATCH offered lessons learned from genetic testing, including the importance of having a genetic counselor on hand to deliver and discuss results or to address follow-up questions, whether those results are given in person or by telemedicine.  CCDI speakers also gave insight into which types of genetic testing are proving most useful and how they are managed and conducted at different institutions. EHRs offer rich data that document someone’s full medical journey and long-term outcomes. By extracting data from EHRs, researchers can look at larger populations. This also helps engage every child and better represent underserved groups. The symposium’s closing panel took a special focus on who this initiative will affect most directly: patients and their families. Themes included: the importance of making molecularly informed medicine available to all patients, no matter their insurance status, location, or treatment facility  the need for tumor typing to be offered early, with the data available to help other families  the opportunity to handle some clinical care and trials remotely, especially for those in underserved communities  the importance of greater data accessibility and availability, not only to break down existing silos for future research, but so that the data can inform current treatment decisions and potentially improve outcomes  At the heart of CCDI is the desire to learn from and treat every child and AYA with childhood cancer. This includes underrepresented minority and underserved populations. Not all children and AYAs have equal access to care. The Children’s Oncology Group, an NCI-supported clinical trials group, operates state-of-the-art centers, but their facilities are not available in all parts of the country or to all patients with cancer. Intentional outreach activities need to be fully inclusive (racially, ethically, and culturally). The CCDI Engagement Committee is an important part of CCDI to help build relationships with patients, families, and communities, especially those who are underrepresented in childhood cancer research. CCDI has made significant progress over the past two years in developing a community of pediatric caregivers, data scientists, researchers, advocates, and patients and their families, all working toward a shared vision. The CCDI community has the potential to transform childhood cancer treatments and outcomes, and to act as a model for data sharing and research in adult cancers. In the coming years, CCDI aims to strengthen and grow its community while working towards its goals. 2019 Symposium Scientific stakeholders and leaders from academia, government, industry, and advocacy organizations gathered in Washington, DC, July 29–31, 2019, for the first CCDI symposium—a scientific meeting that gained a common understanding of the current issues and opportunities in childhood cancer research that could be addressed through better data collection and utilization. NCI invited researchers to submit abstracts for poster presentations at the symposium. Areas of interest for poster submission included research, methodologies, and tools that focus on any of the following categories: scientific and clinical research data needs in childhood and AYA cancers  establishing meaningful datasets for clinical care and associated research progress  building infrastructure to enable federation among disparate databases  extracting knowledge from data  developing adequate and equitable policies for shared data resources  Review the symposium agenda and access accepted poster abstracts. Note that abstracts have not been edited. Day 1, day 2, and day 3 recordings are also available.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Financial Toxicity Following Cancer in Low- and Middle-income Countries - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/cgh/events/global-cancer-seminar-series/financial-toxicity-following-cancer
txt: Dr. Nirmala Bhoo Pathy works as an Associate Professor of Epidemiology in the Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, and practices as a public health physician at the Universiti Malaya Medical Centre, Malaysia. She is also a visiting scholar at Queen’s University Belfast, United Kingdom since 2014. Dr. Bhoo Pathy’s career is focused on optimizing life after cancer in resource-limited settings through research and advocacy. She is particularly interested in the state of cancer control in low- and middle-income countries and enhancing treatment outcomes and patient-centered outcomes in these settings. Financial Toxicity Following Cancer in Low- and Middle-income Countries
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Childhood Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma Treatment (PDQ®) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/eye/hp/child-intraocular-melanoma-treatment-pdq
txt:  Incidence  Risk Factors  Molecular Features  Prognostic Factors  Special Considerations for the Treatment of Children With Cancer  Treatment and Outcome of Childhood Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma  Treatment Options Under Clinical Evaluation for Childhood Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma  Latest Updates to This Summary (01/03/2024)  About This PDQ Summary  Uveal melanoma (iris, ciliary body, choroid) is the most common primary intraocular malignancy. About 2,000 cases of uveal melanoma are diagnosed each year in the United States. It accounts for 5% of all cases of melanoma.[1]  This tumor is most commonly diagnosed in older patients, and the incidence peaks at age 70 years.[2] Pediatric uveal melanoma is extremely rare and accounts for 0.8% to 1.1% of all cases of uveal melanoma.[3] A retrospective, 24-center, observational study  conducted by the European Ophthalmic Oncology Group from 1968 to 2014 identified 114 children (aged 1–17 years) and 185 young adults (aged 18–25 years) with ocular melanoma.[3] The median age at the time of diagnosis for children was 15.1 years. The incidence of disease increased by 0.8% per year between the  ages of 5 and 10 years and 8.8% per year between the ages of 17 and 24 years. Other series have also documented the higher incidence of the disease in adolescents.[4,5] Field MG, Harbour JW: Recent developments in prognostic and predictive testing in uveal melanoma. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 25 (3): 234-9, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] Singh AD, Bergman L, Seregard S: Uveal melanoma: epidemiologic aspects. Ophthalmol Clin North Am 18 (1): 75-84, viii, 2005. [PUBMED Abstract] Al-Jamal RT, Cassoux N, Desjardins L, et al.: The Pediatric Choroidal and Ciliary Body Melanoma Study: A Survey by the European Ophthalmic Oncology Group. Ophthalmology 123 (4): 898-907, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Shields CL, Kaliki S, Arepalli S, et al.: Uveal melanoma in children and teenagers. Saudi J Ophthalmol 27 (3): 197-201, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Pogrzebielski A, Orłowska-Heitzman J, Romanowska-Dixon B: Uveal melanoma in young patients. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 244 (12): 1646-9, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Risk factors for developing uveal melanoma include the following:[1-3] Light eye color. Fair skin color. Inability to tan. Oculodermal melanocytosis. Presence of cutaneous nevi. In a European Oncology Group study, 57% of the pediatric patients were female. Four patients had a preexisting condition that included oculodermal melanocytosis (n = 2) and neurofibromatosis (n = 2).[4] In a review of 13 cases of uveal melanoma in the first 2 years of life, four patients had familial atypical melanoma mole syndrome, one patient had dysplastic nevus syndrome, and one patient had café au lait spots.[5] Weis E, Shah CP, Lajous M, et al.: The association between host susceptibility factors and uveal melanoma: a meta-analysis. Arch Ophthalmol 124 (1): 54-60, 2006. [PUBMED Abstract] Weis E, Shah CP, Lajous M, et al.: The association of cutaneous and iris nevi with uveal melanoma: a meta-analysis. Ophthalmology 116 (3): 536-543.e2, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Singh AD, De Potter P, Fijal BA, et al.: Lifetime prevalence of uveal melanoma in white patients with oculo(dermal) melanocytosis. Ophthalmology 105 (1): 195-8, 1998. [PUBMED Abstract] Al-Jamal RT, Cassoux N, Desjardins L, et al.: The Pediatric Choroidal and Ciliary Body Melanoma Study: A Survey by the European Ophthalmic Oncology Group. Ophthalmology 123 (4): 898-907, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Yousef YA, Alkilany M: Characterization, treatment, and outcome of uveal melanoma in the first two years of life. Hematol Oncol Stem Cell Ther 8 (1): 1-5, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Uveal melanoma is characterized by activating mutations of GNAQ and GNA11, which lead to activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) pathway. In addition, mutations in BAP1 are seen in 84% of metastasizing tumors. Mutations in SF3B1 and EIF1AX are associated with a good prognosis.[1-6] Van Raamsdonk CD, Griewank KG, Crosby MB, et al.: Mutations in GNA11 in uveal melanoma. N Engl J Med 363 (23): 2191-9, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Harbour JW, Onken MD, Roberson ED, et al.: Frequent mutation of BAP1 in metastasizing uveal melanomas. Science 330 (6009): 1410-3, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Gupta MP, Lane AM, DeAngelis MM, et al.: Clinical Characteristics of Uveal Melanoma in Patients With Germline BAP1 Mutations. JAMA Ophthalmol 133 (8): 881-7, 2015. [PUBMED Abstract] Harbour JW, Roberson ED, Anbunathan H, et al.: Recurrent mutations at codon 625 of the splicing factor SF3B1 in uveal melanoma. Nat Genet 45 (2): 133-5, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Martin M, Maßhöfer L, Temming P, et al.: Exome sequencing identifies recurrent somatic mutations in EIF1AX and SF3B1 in uveal melanoma with disomy 3. Nat Genet 45 (8): 933-6, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Van Raamsdonk CD, Bezrookove V, Green G, et al.: Frequent somatic mutations of GNAQ in uveal melanoma and blue naevi. Nature 457 (7229): 599-602, 2009. [PUBMED Abstract] Prognostic factors for uveal melanoma include the following:[1,2] Tumor size. Age. In one series, children experienced a lower overall metastatic rate than adults (at both 10 and 20 years).[1] Ciliary body involvement. Tumor outside the sclera. Metastasis. Genetic changes. For more information, see the Molecular Features section. The survival of children appears to be more favorable than that of young adults and adults, suggesting that the biology of ocular melanoma might be different in children.[1,2] Al-Jamal RT, Cassoux N, Desjardins L, et al.: The Pediatric Choroidal and Ciliary Body Melanoma Study: A Survey by the European Ophthalmic Oncology Group. Ophthalmology 123 (4): 898-907, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Shields CL, Kaliki S, Arepalli S, et al.: Uveal melanoma in children and teenagers. Saudi J Ophthalmol 27 (3): 197-201, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Cancer in children and adolescents is rare, although the overall incidence has been slowly increasing since 1975.[1]    Referral to medical centers with multidisciplinary teams of cancer specialists experienced in treating cancers that occur in childhood and adolescence should be considered. This multidisciplinary team approach incorporates the skills
of the following health care professionals and others to ensure that children receive treatment, supportive care, and rehabilitation
that will achieve optimal survival and quality of life: Primary care physicians. Pediatric surgeons. Radiation
oncologists. Pediatric medical oncologists/hematologists. Rehabilitation
specialists. Pediatric nurse specialists. Social workers. Child-life professionals. Psychologists. For information about supportive care for children and adolescents with cancer, see the summaries on Supportive and Palliative Care. The American Academy of Pediatrics has outlined guidelines for
pediatric cancer centers and their role in the treatment of pediatric patients
with cancer.[2]  At
these pediatric cancer centers, clinical trials are available for most  types of cancer that occur in children and adolescents, and the opportunity
to participate is offered to most patients and their families.  Clinical
trials for children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer are generally
designed to compare potentially better therapy with current standard therapy.  Most of the progress made in identifying curative
therapy for childhood cancers has been achieved through clinical trials.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Dramatic improvements in survival have been achieved for children and adolescents with cancer. Between 1975 and 2020, childhood cancer mortality decreased by more than 50%.[3-5]  Childhood and adolescent cancer survivors require close monitoring because side effects of cancer therapy may persist or develop months or years after treatment.  For information about the incidence, type, and monitoring of late effects in childhood and adolescent cancer survivors, see Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. Childhood cancer is a rare disease, with about 15,000 cases diagnosed annually in the United States in individuals younger than 20 years.[6] The U.S. Rare Diseases Act of 2002 defines a rare disease as one that affects populations smaller than 200,000 people. Therefore, all pediatric cancers are considered rare. The designation of a rare tumor is not uniform among pediatric and adult groups. In adults, rare cancers are defined as those with an annual incidence of fewer than six cases per 100,000 people. They account for up to 24% of all cancers diagnosed in the European Union and about 20% of all cancers diagnosed in the United States.[7,8] Also, the designation of a pediatric rare tumor is not uniform among international groups, as follows: A consensus effort between the European Union Joint Action on Rare Cancers and the European Cooperative Study Group for Rare Pediatric Cancers estimated that 11% of all cancers in patients younger than 20 years could be categorized as very rare. This consensus group defined very rare cancers as those with annual incidences of fewer than 2 cases per 1 million people. However, three additional histologies (thyroid carcinoma, melanoma, and testicular cancer) with incidences of more than 2 cases per 1 million people were also included  in the very rare group because there is a lack of knowledge and expertise in the management of these tumors.[9] The Children's Oncology Group (COG) defines rare pediatric cancers as those listed in the International Classification of Childhood Cancer subgroup XI, which includes thyroid cancers, melanomas and nonmelanoma skin cancers, and multiple types of carcinomas (e.g., adrenocortical carcinomas, nasopharyngeal carcinomas, and most adult-type carcinomas such as breast cancers, colorectal cancers, etc.).[10]  These diagnoses account for about 5% of the cancers diagnosed in children aged 0 to 14 years and about 27% of the cancers diagnosed in adolescents aged 15 to 19 years.[4] Most cancers in subgroup XI are either melanomas or thyroid cancers, with other cancer types accounting for only 2% of the cancers in children aged 0 to 14 years and 9.3% of the cancers in adolescents aged 15 to 19 years. Most cancers in subgroup XI are either melanomas or thyroid cancers, with other cancer types accounting for only 2% of the cancers in children aged 0 to 14 years and 9.3% of the cancers in adolescents aged 15 to 19 years. These rare cancers are extremely challenging to study because of the low number of patients with any individual diagnosis, the predominance of rare cancers in the adolescent population, and the lack of clinical trials for adolescents with rare cancers. Information about these tumors may also be found in sources relevant to
adults with cancer, such as Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma Treatment. Smith MA, Seibel NL, Altekruse SF, et al.: Outcomes for children and adolescents with cancer: challenges for the twenty-first century. J Clin Oncol 28 (15): 2625-34, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] American Academy of Pediatrics: Standards for pediatric cancer centers. Pediatrics  134 (2): 410-4, 2014. Also available online. Last accessed December 15, 2023. Smith MA, Altekruse SF, Adamson PC, et al.: Declining childhood and adolescent cancer mortality. Cancer 120 (16): 2497-506, 2014. [PUBMED Abstract] National Cancer Institute: NCCR*Explorer: An interactive website for NCCR cancer statistics. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Available online. Last accessed December 15, 2023. Surveillance Research Program, National Cancer Institute: SEER*Explorer: An interactive website for SEER cancer statistics. 	Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Available online. Last accessed March 6, 2024. Ward E, DeSantis C, Robbins A, et al.: Childhood and adolescent cancer statistics, 2014. CA Cancer J Clin 64 (2): 83-103, 2014 Mar-Apr. [PUBMED Abstract] Gatta G, Capocaccia R, Botta L, et al.: Burden and centralised treatment in Europe of rare tumours: results of RARECAREnet-a population-based study. Lancet Oncol 18 (8): 1022-1039, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] DeSantis CE, Kramer JL, Jemal A: The burden of rare cancers in the United States. CA Cancer J Clin 67 (4): 261-272, 2017. [PUBMED Abstract] Ferrari A, Brecht IB, Gatta G, et al.: Defining and listing very rare cancers of paediatric age: consensus of the Joint Action on Rare Cancers in cooperation with the European Cooperative Study Group for Pediatric Rare Tumors. Eur J Cancer 110: 120-126, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Pappo AS, Krailo M, Chen Z, et al.: Infrequent tumor initiative of the Children's Oncology Group: initial lessons learned and their impact on future plans. J Clin Oncol 28 (33): 5011-6, 2010. [PUBMED Abstract] Treatment options for childhood intraocular (uveal) melanoma include the following: Surgery. Radiation therapy. Laser surgery.[1,2] Bispecific fusion proteins (tebentafusp). A retrospective single-institution review identified 18 patients younger than 21 years with uveal melanoma.[3][Level of evidence C1]  Patients were treated with enucleation (n = 9), transscleral en bloc resection (n = 3), plaque radiation therapy (n = 5), or proton-beam radiation therapy (n = 1). Eight of these patients (44%) developed metastatic disease, all of whom died of their disease. The median survival time after detection of metastasis was 2.3 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.0–5.2 months). The median overall survival (OS) of the 18 patients after treatment of the primary intraocular tumors was 11.9 years (95% CI, 7.3–16.5 years). Laser surgery has been used to treat childhood intraocular melanoma.[1,2] An open-label, randomized, phase III trial  of adult patients with previously untreated HLA-A*02:01–positive metastatic uveal melanoma investigated treatment with  tebentafusp.  Tebentafusp is a bispecific restricted T-cell receptor for the glycoprotein 100 peptide; it is fused to a CD3 single-chain variable fragment. Patients were randomly assigned to receive either tebentafusp or treatment according to the investigator's choice.[4] Patients who received tebentafusp had an OS rate of 73%, compared with 50% for patients in the control group (hazard ratio [HR] for death, 0.51; P < .001). The progression-free survival rate was also significantly higher for the tebentafusp group (31% vs. 16% at 6 months; HR for progression or death, 0.71; P = .01). The most common toxicities for patients who received tebentafusp were cytokine release syndrome, mostly grades 1 and 2, and rash. For information about the treatment of uveal melanoma in adults, see Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma Treatment. Al-Jamal RT, Cassoux N, Desjardins L, et al.: The Pediatric Choroidal and Ciliary Body Melanoma Study: A Survey by the European Ophthalmic Oncology Group. Ophthalmology 123 (4): 898-907, 2016. [PUBMED Abstract] Shields CL, Kaliki S, Arepalli S, et al.: Uveal melanoma in children and teenagers. Saudi J Ophthalmol 27 (3): 197-201, 2013. [PUBMED Abstract] Fry MV, Augsburger JJ, Corrêa ZM: Clinical Features, Metastasis, and Survival in Patients Younger Than 21 Years With Posterior Uveal Melanoma. JAMA Ophthalmol 137 (1): 75-81, 2019. [PUBMED Abstract] Nathan P, Hassel JC, Rutkowski P, et al.: Overall Survival Benefit with Tebentafusp in Metastatic Uveal Melanoma. N Engl J Med 385 (13): 1196-1206, 2021. [PUBMED Abstract] Information about National Cancer Institute (NCI)–supported clinical trials can be found on the NCI website. For information about clinical trials sponsored by other organizations, see the ClinicalTrials.gov website. The PDQ cancer information summaries are reviewed regularly and updated as new information becomes available. This section describes the latest changes made to this summary as of the date above. Editorial changes were made to this summary. This summary is written and maintained by the PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board, which is
editorially independent of NCI.  The summary reflects an independent review of
the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or NIH.  More
information about summary policies and the role of the PDQ Editorial Boards  in
maintaining the PDQ summaries can be found on the About This PDQ Summary and PDQ® Cancer Information for Health Professionals pages. This PDQ cancer information summary for health professionals provides comprehensive, peer-reviewed, evidence-based information about the treatment of pediatric intraocular (uveal) melanoma. It is intended as a resource to inform and assist clinicians in the care of their patients.  It does not provide formal guidelines or recommendations for making health care decisions. This summary is reviewed regularly and updated as necessary by the PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board, which is editorially independent of the National Cancer Institute (NCI).  The summary reflects an independent review of the literature and does not represent a policy statement of NCI or the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Board members review recently published articles each month to determine whether an article should: be discussed at a meeting, be cited with text, or replace or update an existing article that is already cited. Changes to the summaries are made through a consensus process in which Board members evaluate the strength of the evidence in  the published articles and determine how the article should be included in the summary. The lead reviewers for Childhood Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma Treatment are: Denise Adams, MD (Children's Hospital Boston) Karen J. Marcus, MD, FACR (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Boston Children's Hospital) William H. Meyer, MD Paul A. Meyers, MD (Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center) Thomas A. Olson, MD (Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center of Children's Healthcare of Atlanta - Egleston Campus) Alberto S. Pappo, MD (St. Jude Children's Research Hospital) Arthur Kim Ritchey, MD (Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC) Carlos Rodriguez-Galindo, MD (St. Jude Children's Research Hospital) Stephen J. Shochat, MD (St. Jude Children's Research Hospital) Any comments or questions about the summary content should be submitted to Cancer.gov through the NCI website's Email Us. Do not contact the individual Board Members with questions or comments about the summaries. Board members will not respond to individual inquiries. Some of the reference citations in this summary are accompanied by a level-of-evidence designation. These designations are intended to help readers assess the strength of the evidence supporting the use of specific interventions or approaches. The PDQ Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board uses a formal evidence ranking system in developing its level-of-evidence designations. PDQ is a registered trademark. Although the content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text, it cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless it is presented in its entirety and is regularly updated. However, an author would be permitted to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks succinctly: [include excerpt from the summary].” The preferred citation for this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Pediatric Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Childhood Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/eye/hp/child-intraocular-melanoma-treatment-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 31909938] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use within the PDQ summaries only. Permission to use images outside the context of PDQ information must be obtained from the owner(s) and cannot be granted by  the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the illustrations in this summary, along with many other cancer-related images, is available in Visuals Online, a collection of over 2,000 scientific images. Based on the strength of the available evidence, treatment options may be described as either “standard” or “under clinical evaluation.” These classifications should not be used as a basis for insurance reimbursement determinations. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s Email Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Risk factors identified for certain lymphoma subtypes - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2014/nhlinterlymphmonograph
txt:  Posted:
September 2, 2014  240-760-6600 In a large international collaborative analysis of risk factors for non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), scientists were able to quantify risk associated with medical history, lifestyle factors, family history of blood or lymph-borne cancers, and occupation for 11 different NHL subtypes, including less common subtypes. Each year, more than half a million people worldwide are diagnosed with NHL, a diverse group of cancers of the immune system. Although past research suggested different subtypes of NHL may have different causes, those individual studies lacked sufficient statistical power to show this definitively. To overcome this problem, over 100 scientists from the International Lymphoma Epidemiology Consortium pooled data from their studies to produce 13 papers published as a monograph in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute on August 30, 2014. Analyses from the pooled population included 17,471 people with NHL and 23,096 without the disease. Based on 20 studies conducted in North America, Europe, Israel, and Australia from which the data were pooled, the authors found that: Risks differed significantly among NHL subtypes for medical history factors (autoimmune diseases, hepatitis C virus, eczema, blood transfusion), family history of leukemia and multiple myeloma, alcohol consumption, cigarette smoking, and certain occupations.  Risks were generally similar among NHL subtypes for family history of NHL overall, recreational sun exposure, hay fever, allergies, and socioeconomic status.  Autoimmune diseases showed a distinctive pattern: illnesses that activate B-cells were more likely to elevate risk for B-cell lymphomas (e.g., people with a history of Sjögren’s syndrome had nearly 40 times the risk for marginal zone lymphoma). Similarly, those illnesses that activate T-cells were more likely to elevate risk for T-cell NHLs.  Immune dysfunction was more strongly associated with peripheral T-cell lymphoma, marginal zone lymphoma, Burkitt lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma than it was with mycosis fungoides/Sézary syndrome, chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL/SLL), follicular lymphoma, and mantle cell lymphoma.  These findings should provide crucial insight into the biological and clinical characteristics that drive NHL subtypes. This large-scale international interdisciplinary effort demonstrates the commitment of the investigators to share data to solve complex problems that require large sample sizes. The effort, which included investigators from the fields of epidemiology, immunology, laboratory science and pathology, was co-led by Lindsay M. Morton, Ph.D., National Cancer Institute’s Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Reducing the Cancer Burden Caused by Tobacco - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/public-health/michael-fiore-reducing-tobacco-cancer-burden
txt: Michael Fiore, M.D., M.P.H., M.B.A. Hilldale Professor of Medicine, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health Founder and Director, University of Wisconsin Center for Tobacco Research and Intervention  Every year, 70% of smokers in the United States visit a health care professional. Many, however, leave without receiving any smoking cessation assistance. Approximately half of smokers diagnosed with cancer continue to smoke, and only some health care centers provide these patients with services to quit. “This is a missed opportunity to help people become healthier and live longer,” said physician and researcher Michael Fiore. Tobacco use in the United States continues to cause unparalleled harm to the nation’s health, directly causing one out of every five deaths. Moreover, tobacco causes at least 20 different types of cancer, including up to 90% of all lung cancers. Cigarette smoking is the main culprit, being responsible for more than 480,000 deaths per year in this country, including nearly 42,000 deaths from exposure to secondhand smoke. Michael predicts that “eliminating smoking in America would, over time, reduce all cancer deaths by almost one-third.” As a leader in tobacco control, Michael helped to spearhead a working group of the NCI Board of Scientific Advisors that recommended research priorities for this field. The group’s 2016 report discussed a wide range of research gaps. One of these was optimizing the effectiveness of the evidence-based tobacco cessation interventions that already exist. The report also highlighted groups that disproportionately bear the burden of cancer and other health consequences of continued tobacco use. NCI has a long history of supporting tobacco control research and launched several new activities in 2017 relevant to the priorities the working group identified. These include additional funding to NCI-Designated Cancer Centers to bolster smoking cessation activities and focused efforts to reduce tobacco use by vulnerable groups, including the young, the socioeconomically disadvantaged, and individuals with mental health issues or HIV. Michael is hopeful about NCI’s response to the working group’s recommendations and commitment to reducing the cancer burden in the United States. “Recognizing that tobacco use is a chronic disease—and not just a bad habit—informs our ongoing research to identify and implement the best prevention and cessation strategies,” he said.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Study offers insight into genetic alterations in osteosarcoma - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2020/osteosarcoma-genetic-variants
txt:  Posted:
March 19, 2020  240-760-6600 An x-ray of a femur (thigh bone) from a patient with osteosarcoma. A study by researchers at the National Cancer Institute (NCI), part of the National Institutes of Health, offers new insight into genetic alterations associated with osteosarcoma, the most common cancerous bone tumor of children and adolescents. The researchers found that more people with osteosarcoma carry harmful, or likely harmful, variants in known cancer-susceptibility genes than people without osteosarcoma. This finding has implications for genetic testing of children with osteosarcoma, as well as their families. The study was published March 19, 2020, in JAMA Oncology. “With this study, we wanted to find out how many people with osteosarcoma may have been at high risk for it because of their genetics,” said Lisa Mirabello, Ph.D., of NCI’s Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics (DCEG), who led the research. “We not only learned that at least a quarter of the people in the study with osteosarcoma had a variant in a gene known to predispose someone to cancer, we also uncovered variants that had never before been associated with this cancer.” In the study, the researchers looked for harmful (or likely harmful) variants in 238 known cancer-susceptibility genes in DNA samples from 1,244 people with osteosarcoma and compared the frequency of such variants with that in people in a cancer-free control group. They identified a harmful or likely harmful variant in a known cancer-susceptibility gene in 28% of the people with osteosarcoma. By contrast, only 12% of people in the cancer-free control group had such a variant. When the authors looked at a subset of 166 genes that are known to be inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion—that is, where inheriting one alteration from one parent is sufficient to increase cancer risk—they saw harmful or likely harmful variants in about 18% of the patients but only 5% of controls. And another 25% of the patients had a rare variant of uncertain significance that was predicted to be harmful. Patients who had harmful variants were younger at age of osteosarcoma diagnosis, on average, than patients who did not (15.3 years versus 16.9 years). In addition, the youngest children in the study (ages 0-10 years) had the highest prevalence of harmful variants. If a child is found to have a gene variant associated with osteosarcoma, the authors say that genetic testing may be warranted for the child’s family members, who may also carry the variant. Family members who have the variant could undergo screening for the cancers associated with that variant, potentially leading to earlier detection. “The idea is, if you have a new patient with osteosarcoma, we found that a quarter of them have a [harmful] variant in a gene associated with increased risk of other cancers,” said Sharon Savage, M.D., senior author of the study, also of DCEG. “Genetic testing of the patient likely makes sense, because they could be at risk of other cancers, and they might have family members who carry the variant who might be at risk of other cancers.” Because osteosarcoma is a rare cancer, the researchers assembled case samples from 10 international research centers, making this the largest collection to date of a pediatric solid cancer evaluated for cancer-susceptibility gene variants. The researchers found harmful or likely harmful variants in several cancer-susceptibility genes that hadn’t been associated with osteosarcoma—or, indeed, pediatric cancers—before. Because the biological function for the variants newly found to be associated with osteosarcoma remain unknown, this could open new areas of research related to cancer susceptibility. This study is part of a larger pediatric cancer susceptibility research program at NCI through which researchers are studying common and rare causes of osteosarcoma and other pediatric cancers. In earlier research, Dr. Mirabello found that TP53 gene variants, which are associated with the cancer predisposition disease Li-Fraumeni Syndrome, were more common than previously thought in children and adolescents with osteosarcoma. In the current study, TP53 gene variants had the highest frequency of the harmful or likely harmful cancer-susceptibility gene variants in children with osteosarcoma, another finding that Dr. Mirabello said warrants additional research. About the National Cancer Institute (NCI): NCI leads the National Cancer Program and NIH’s efforts to dramatically reduce the prevalence of cancer and improve the lives of cancer patients and their families, through research into prevention and cancer biology, the development of new interventions, and the training and mentoring of new researchers. For more information about cancer, please visit the NCI website at cancer.gov or call NCI’s contact center, the Cancer Information Service, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit nih.gov.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Acquired Resistance to Therapy Network (ARTNet) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/research-programs/artnet
txt: ARTNet (funded through RFA-CA-21-052/RFA-CA-21-053 by DCB and the NCI Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis) focuses on the mechanistic bases of acquired resistance to cancer therapies and disease recurrence. Its central goal is to balance basic, pre-clinical, and translational research using an iterative team science structure that will enable hypothesis testing on the biological basis of resistance in clinically relevant model systems. ARTNet also aims to provide evidence along the shared tumor-tumor microenvironment (TME) continuum to inform new strategies that can be better translated into future clinical trials. Collectively, the network represents a range of treatment modalities (e.g., chemotherapy, radiation, targeted agents, immunotherapies, combined modalities) and cancer types in pursuit of addressing compelling questions and significant barriers in acquired therapy resistance research.  ARTNet News  ARTNet Digital Media  DCB Contact for ARTNet  Funded Projects  ARTNet News ARTNet Digital Media DCB Contact for ARTNet Funded Projects ARTNet News Recent ARTNet updates, including information about the ARTNet Bi-Annual Meeting, investigator news, recent publications, working groups, shared resources, and more can be found in the ARTNet Newsletter. ARTNet Digital Media Learn more about ARTNet via the following digital media platforms: ARTNet Website  ARTNet Twitter: @NCIARTNet  DCB Contact for ARTNet For additional information about ARTNet, please contact Dr. Jeff Hildesheim. Funded Projects ARTNet Research Centers (U54s) Pancreatic Cancer ARTNet Center ARTNet Coordinating and Data Management Center (U24)
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: BuMel - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/bumel
txt: This chemotherapy combination contains the drugs busulfan and melphalan hydrochloride. Combinations usually work better than single drugs because 
         different drugs kill 
         cancer 
         cells in different ways. Each of the drugs in this combination is approved by the 
         Food and Drug 
         Administration (FDA) 
         to treat cancer or conditions related to cancer. BuMel 
         is used to treat:  Neuroblastoma that is high risk. It is used to prepare patients for a stem cell transplant.  This combination may also be used with other drugs or 
         treatments or to treat other types of cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Dr. Ashley Laughney Investigates Lung Cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/research-programs/csbc/ashley-laughney
txt: Ashley Laughney, Ph.D., a former CSBC junior investigator at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC), trained in engineering, which she describes as “the art of problem-solving.” As a graduate student at Dartmouth, she developed spectral imaging methods to identify margins of tumors during surgical procedures. However, during this time, Ashley focused on the design and characterization of technological platforms rather than the pathogenesis of cancer. Her exposure to basic cancer research occurred during her first postdoctoral fellowship at Massachusetts General Hospital. Using imaging technologies to study chemotherapeutic resistance, she became interested in research at the interface of computation and cancer biology. Now, Ashley uses her engineering background, such as hardware development and the analysis of big data, to solve complex research questions about cancer metastasis. In this interview, she discusses her career path, the importance of both mentors and trainees in the cancer systems biology field, and her research investigating the role of immune cells in lung cancer. I’m still learning in this field. I surround myself with experts in engineering, cancer research, and systems biology. Before I bridged engineering and biology, I focused on one element or the other at different stages. For example, I learned about mouse models of cancer from hands-on experience before I was ready to apply systems biology approaches to my in vivo studies. Along with training in the technical aspects of cancer biology, I also had to learn how to think about a research problem and experimental design. Mentors have been extremely influential and important on this journey. Behind every good scientist, there are good mentors. Ralph Weissleder taught me how to think about and test important research hypotheses. Joan Massagué and Dana Pe’er taught me how to look, in an unbiased way, at heterogenous and complex data sets. My graduate school advisors trained me to think for myself and develop experimental systems. Good mentors are the key to success in science. It can’t be overstated enough. Collaborations in this interdisciplinary field are often initiated by talented graduate students and post-docs. They form a bridge between faculty members across disciplines. Although principal investigators bring their expertise to a team project, it sometimes takes trainees and junior investigators to fully integrate across and establish communication between different laboratories. It takes dedication and time to learn aspects of multiple disciplines integrated across cancer systems biology. Also, don’t be shy. You need to ask questions to learn and progress in this field. There are a lot of important things to get done in this space and I think it’s a very rewarding research path. I predominantly use single-cell RNA sequencing to profile the heterogeneity of cells in patient tumor samples and mouse models of cancer. In my Ph.D. work, I studied spatial information related to tumors. I think the next step for single-cell technologies will be to add back spatial context about the cellular diversity of cancer. In primary tumors from lung cancer patients, where we saw the greatest cellular diversity, there was an exclusion of NK cells. Similarly, data from mouse models of delayed or indolent tumors showed that NK cells keep cancer growth in check. When we deplete NK cells from in vivo cancer models, we get overt metastasis. This led us to investigate the influence of NK cells on cancer heterogeneity. Evidence from our experiments suggests that NK cells prune back certain stem-like cell lineages in the lung that promote tumor metastasis. In the absence of NK cells, the stem-like cells co-opt developmental pathways involved in lung regeneration to generate diverse progeny with metastatic capabilities. By understanding the biology of micro-metastatic disease, specifically growth permissive conditions for metastatic cancer cells, we can therapeutically target specific tumor cells before metastasis occurs. The studies will also help us predict what tumors will metastasize, so clinicians can monitor patients to detect metastatic lesions at an earlier stage. Weill Cornell Profile of Ashley Laughney  Laughney Lab Website  MSKCC Center for Tumor-Immune Systems Biology Website 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: New cancer models to accelerate research - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2016/hcmi-cancer-models
txt:  Posted:
July 11, 2016  240-760-6600 Microscopic image of colorectal cells grown into organoids An international project to develop a large, globally accessible bank of new cancer cell culture models for the research community launched today. The National Cancer Institute (NCI), part of the National Institutes of Health; Cancer Research UK, London, England; the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, England; and the foundation Hubrecht Organoid Technology, Utrecht, Netherlands, are joining forces to develop the Human Cancer Models Initiative (HCMI), which will bring together expertise from around the world to make about 1,000 cancer cell models. Using new techniques to grow cells, scientists can make models that will better resemble the tissue architecture and complexity of human tumors than the cell lines used today. Louis Staudt, M.D., Ph.D., director of NCI’s Center for Cancer Genomics, said, “As part of NCI’s Precision Medicine Initiative in Oncology, this new project is timed perfectly to take advantage of the latest cell culture and genomic sequencing techniques to create models that are representative of patient tumors and are annotated with genomic and clinical information. This effort is a first step toward learning how to use these tools to design individualized treatments.” Genetic sequencing data from the tumors and derived models will be available to researchers, along with clinical data about the patients and their tumors. All information related to the models will be shared in a way that protects patient privacy. Ian Walker, Ph.D., Cancer Research UK’s director of clinical research and strategic partnerships, said, “This exciting new project means that we can expand our resources for researchers around the world. We want scientists to have the best resources to be able to easily study all types of cancer. And these new cell lines could transform how we study cancer and could help to develop better treatments for patients.” Scientists will make the models using tissue from patients with different types of cancer, potentially including rare and children’s cancers, which are often underrepresented or not available at all in existing cell line collections. The new models will have the potential to reflect the biology of tumors more accurately and better represent the overall cancer patient population. The HCMI collaborators aim to speed up development of new models and to make research more efficient by avoiding unnecessary duplication of scientific efforts. Mathew Garnett, Ph.D., group leader at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, said, “New cancer model derivation technologies are allowing us to generate even more and improved cancer models for research. A concerted and coordinated effort to make new models will accelerate this process, while also allowing for rapid learning, protocol sharing, and standardized culturing methods.” HCMI could transform research and will allow scientists to study many aspects of cellular biology and cancer, including how the disease progresses, drug resistance, and the development of precision medicine treatments. Hans Clevers, M.D., Ph.D., of the foundation Hubrecht Organoid Technology, said, “We are delighted to take part in this global partnership to make new resources for researchers.” The National Cancer Institute leads the National Cancer Program and the NIH’s efforts to dramatically reduce the prevalence of cancer and improve the lives of cancer patients and their families, through research into prevention and cancer biology, the development of new interventions, and the training and mentoring of new researchers. For more information about cancer, please visit the NCI website at www.cancer.gov or call NCI's Cancer Information Service at 1-800-4-CANCER. About Cancer Research UK: Cancer Research UK is the world’s leading cancer charity dedicated to saving lives through research.  Cancer Research UK’s pioneering work into the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of cancer has helped save millions of lives.  Cancer Research UK receives no government funding for its life-saving research. Every step it makes towards beating cancer relies on every pound donated.  Cancer Research UK has been at the heart of the progress that has already seen survival in the UK double in the last forty years.  Today, 2 in 4 people survive their cancer for at least 10 years. Cancer Research UK’s ambition is to accelerate progress so that 3 in 4 people will survive their cancer for at least 10 years within the next 20 years.  Cancer Research UK supports research into all aspects of cancer through the work of over 4,000 scientists, doctors and nurses.  Together with its partners and supporters, Cancer Research UK's vision is to bring forward the day when all cancers are cured.  For further information about Cancer Research UK's work or to find out how to support the charity, please call 0300 123 1022 or visit www.cancerresearchuk.org. Follow us on Twitter and Facebook. About the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute: The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute is one of the world's leading genome centers. Through its ability to conduct research at scale, it is able to engage in bold and long-term exploratory projects that are designed to influence and empower medical science globally. Institute research findings, generated through its own research programmes and through its leading role in international consortia, are being used to develop new diagnostics and treatments for human disease. www.sanger.ac.uk About the foundation Hubrecht Organoid Technology: The foundation Hubrecht Organoid Technology (HUB) is a not-for-profit organization founded by the Royal Netherlands Academy of Sciences and the University Medical Center Utrecht. The HUB exploits the pioneering work of Prof. Hans Clevers, who discovered methods to grow stem cell-derived human ‘mini-organs’  (organoids) from tissues of patients with various diseases.  The organoids, that are part of the Living Biobank, are characterized by genome sequencing, expression profiling and sensitivity to known and experimental drugs to establish a database linking genetic and transcriptional information to drug responsiveness.  The HUB offers licenses to its patented Organoid Technology for drug-screening and access to organoids in the Living Biobank for preclinical drug discovery and validation.  In addition, the HUB provides drug screening services to third parties.  More info at www.hub4organoids.eu
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: About NCI Frederick - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/nci-frederick/about
txt: NCI maintains a 68-acre research campus in Frederick, Maryland, about 40 miles northwest of the main National Institutes of Health campus in Bethesda, Maryland. Some 2,700 government and contract biomedical researchers, laboratory technicians, statisticians, and scientists from multiple disciplines work at NCI Frederick. The NCI Frederick campus is home to Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR), a government-owned, contractor-operated research and development center that provides a rapid response to emerging national and global health problems and conducts long-term research on cancer, as well as infectious and other diseases on behalf of the federal government. FNLCR’s facilities are on the NCI Frederick campus and at additional locations in Frederick, such as Riverside Research Park. In addition to FNLCR—which encompasses multiple buildings—the campus is made up of numerous NCI cancer research labs, technology facilities, resource centers, and administrative offices. Most of the laboratories are part of NCI’s Intramural Research Program (IRP). IRP includes investigators whose expertise span a wide variety of disciplines and who share a mission to enhance cancer research, prevention, treatment, and training. About two-thirds of the scientists who work at NCI Frederick are employees of the private sector company that is contracted to operate FNLCR for NCI (currently Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc.). Scientists conduct research supported by NCI’s Center for Cancer Research, Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and other NIH and Department of Health and Human Services agencies. NCI’s FNLCR is the only Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC) devoted exclusively to biomedical research. The lab works at the forefront of basic, translational, and clinical science. About 70% of the lab is focused on cancer research and 30% on infectious and other diseases, including HIV/AIDS, Zika and Ebola viruses, and COVID-19. FNLCR operates in the public interest as a shared national resource, collaborating with public and private partners to speed delivery of lifesaving therapies and prevention agents and conducts research on long-standing intractable cancers and other disease areas. NCI’s presence in Frederick, Maryland goes back 50 years, to the months just before the signing of the National Cancer Act and what became widely known as the “war on cancer.” President Richard Nixon signed the National Cancer Act on December 23, 1971, calling it a “national commitment for the conquest of cancer.” In October of that year, Nixon ordered that 68 acres and 67 buildings belonging to the US Army at Fort Detrick in Frederick be converted into a leading center for cancer research to be led by NCI in partnership with the private sector. The conversion of the property met two of Nixon’s goals: the termination of research on offensive biological weapons at Fort Detrick and the campaign to eradicate cancer. In the October 1971 announcement, Nixon said some of the nation’s most sophisticated scientific facilities at Fort Detrick would be “converted so effectively and so inexpensively to an intensive program of cancer research.” Establishment of the NCI Frederick campus expanded laboratory space for NCI, whose main base of operations was, and is, on the NIH campus in Bethesda, Maryland. Today, in addition to the NIH and Frederick campuses, most administrative staff work at an NCI building at Shady Grove in Gaithersburg, Maryland. In addition, NCI operates labs in other localities in Maryland, as well North Carolina and Montana. In 1975, the National Science Foundation notified the Department of Health and Human Services that the Frederick lab met the criteria for and was designated as a Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC). FFRDCs are government-owned, contractor-operated research facilities that operate in the public interest, collaborating with public and private partners to achieve research goals. Now called the Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR), a designation it has carried since 2012, it is the only national laboratory devoted entirely to biomedical research. See the FNLCR website for research conducted at the lab. NCI Frederick occupies a campus that is surrounded by, but not a part of, Fort Detrick. The campus includes labs and offices of FNLCR (owned by NCI and operated by a private contractor), NCI administrative offices that oversee the FNLCR contract, several labs operated by NCI’s Center for Cancer Research and Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, and other areas. The main building of FNLCR is the Advanced Technology Research Facility (ATRF). It was completed in 2012 and is located in Riverside Research Park in Frederick, about 5 miles from the legacy NCI Frederick campus. ATRF consolidates labs and operations that had been scattered among more than 30 buildings on the NCI Frederick campus. Additional facilities at NCI Frederick include the Central Repository and the Vaccine Pilot Plant.    NCI Frederick Organization and Leadership


NCI Frederick is managed by federal government employees in the Office of Scientific Operations (OSO) and the Management Operations Support Branch (MOSB).  NCI Frederick Campus and Offsite Facilities


The NCI Frederick main campus is surrounded by but is not a part of the Fort Detrick US Army facility in Frederick, Maryland. The campus is accessed by passing through the gates of Fort Detrick.  NCI Frederick Contacts 


Contact information for NCI Frederick security and management.  NCI Frederick is managed by federal government employees in the Office of Scientific Operations (OSO) and the Management Operations Support Branch (MOSB). The NCI Frederick main campus is surrounded by but is not a part of the Fort Detrick US Army facility in Frederick, Maryland. The campus is accessed by passing through the gates of Fort Detrick. Contact information for NCI Frederick security and management.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Vaginal Cancer Treatment - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/vaginal/patient/vaginal-treatment-pdq
txt:  General Information About Vaginal Cancer  Stages of Vaginal Cancer  Treatment Option Overview  Treatment of Vaginal Intraepithelial Neoplasia (VaIN)  Treatment of Stage I Vaginal Cancer  Treatment of Stage II, Stage III, and Stage IVA Vaginal Cancer  Treatment of Stage IVB Vaginal Cancer  Treatment of Recurrent Vaginal Cancer  To Learn More About Vaginal Cancer  About This PDQ Summary  Vaginal cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in
		  the vagina. Older age and having an HPV infection are risk factors for vaginal cancer. Signs and symptoms of vaginal cancer include pain or abnormal vaginal bleeding. Tests that examine the vagina and other organs  in the pelvis are used to diagnose vaginal cancer. Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The vagina is the canal leading from the cervix (the opening of the uterus) to the outside of the body. At birth, a  baby passes out of the body through the vagina (also called the birth canal).    EnlargeAnatomy of the female reproductive system. The organs in the female reproductive system include the uterus, ovaries, fallopian tubes, cervix, and vagina. The uterus has a muscular outer layer called the myometrium and an inner lining called the endometrium. Vaginal cancer is not common. There are two main types of vaginal cancer: Squamous cell carcinoma:   Cancer that forms in the thin, flat cells lining the inside of the vagina. Squamous cell vaginal cancer spreads slowly and usually stays near the vagina, but may spread to the lungs, liver, or bone. This is the most common type of vaginal cancer. Adenocarcinoma: Cancer that begins in
			 glandular cells.
			 Glandular cells in the lining of the vagina make and release fluids such
			 as mucus. Adenocarcinoma is more likely than squamous cell cancer to spread to the lungs and lymph nodes. A rare type of adenocarcinoma (clear cell adenocarcinoma)   is linked to being exposed to diethylstilbestrol (DES)  before birth. Adenocarcinomas that are not linked  with being exposed to DES are most common in women after menopause. Anything that increases a person's chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Not every person with one or more of these risk factors will develop vaginal cancer, and it will develop in people who don't have any known risk factors. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk.  Risk factors for vaginal cancer include the following: Being 60 years or older. Having a human papilloma virus (HPV) infection, which can be linked to squamous cell carcinoma of the vagina. Being exposed to DES while in the mother's womb.   In the 1950s, the drug DES was given to some pregnant women to prevent miscarriage (premature birth of a fetus that cannot survive). This is  linked to  a  rare form of vaginal cancer  called  clear cell adenocarcinoma. The rates of this disease  were highest in the mid-1970s, and it is extremely rare now. Having had a hysterectomy for tumors that were benign (not cancer) or cancer. Vaginal cancer often does not cause early signs or symptoms. It may be found during  a routine pelvic exam and Pap test. Signs and symptoms may be caused by vaginal cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following: Bleeding or discharge not related to menstrual periods. Pain during sexual intercourse. Pain in the pelvic area. A lump in the vagina. Pain when urinating. Constipation. In addition to asking about your personal and family health history and doing a physical exam, your doctor may perform the following tests and procedures: Pelvic exam: An exam of the vagina, cervix, uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, and rectum.    A speculum is inserted into the vagina and the doctor or nurse looks at the vagina and cervix for signs of disease.  A Pap test of the cervix is usually done.  The doctor or nurse also inserts one or two lubricated, gloved fingers of one hand into the vagina and places the other hand over the lower abdomen to feel the size, shape, and position of the uterus and ovaries. The doctor or nurse also inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into the rectum to feel for lumps or abnormal areas.EnlargePelvic exam. A doctor or nurse inserts one or two lubricated, gloved fingers of one hand into the vagina and presses on the lower abdomen with the other hand. This is done to feel the size, shape, and position of the uterus and ovaries. The vagina, cervix,  fallopian tubes, and rectum are also checked. Pap test: A procedure to collect cells from the surface of the cervix and vagina.  A piece of cotton, a brush, or a small wooden stick is used to gently scrape cells from the cervix and vagina.  The cells are viewed under a microscope to find out if they are abnormal.  This procedure is also called a Pap smear.EnlargePap test. A speculum is inserted into the vagina to widen it. Then, a brush is inserted into the vagina to collect cells from the cervix. The cells are checked under a microscope for signs of disease. Human papillomavirus (HPV) test: A laboratory test used to check DNA or RNA for certain types of HPV infection. Cells are collected from the cervix and DNA or RNA from the cells is checked to find out if an infection is caused by a type of HPV that is linked to cervical cancer. This test may be done using the sample of cells removed during a Pap test. This test may also be done if the results of a Pap test show certain abnormal cervical cells. Colposcopy: A procedure in which a colposcope (a lighted, magnifying instrument) is used to check the vagina and cervix for abnormal areas.   Tissue samples may be taken using a curette (spoon-shaped instrument) or a brush and checked under a microscope for signs of disease. Biopsy: The removal of cells or tissues from the vagina and cervix so they can be  viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. If a Pap test shows abnormal cells in the vagina, a biopsy may be done during a colposcopy. The prognosis depends on the following: The stage of the cancer (whether it is in the vagina only or has spread to other areas). The size of the tumor. The grade of tumor cells (how different they look from normal cells under a microscope). Where the cancer is within the vagina. Whether there are signs or symptoms at diagnosis. Whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back). Treatment options depend on the following: The stage and size of the cancer. Whether the cancer is close to other organs that may be damaged by treatment. Whether the tumor is made up of squamous cells or is an adenocarcinoma. Whether the patient has a uterus or has had a hysterectomy. Whether the patient has had past radiation treatment to the pelvis. After vaginal cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the vagina or to other parts of the body. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. In vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VaIN), abnormal cells are found in tissue lining the inside of the vagina. The following stages are used for vaginal cancer:Stage IStage IIStage IIIStage IV Vaginal cancer may recur (come back) after it has been treated. Stage I Stage II Stage III Stage IV The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the vagina or to other
parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the
staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know
the stage in order to plan  treatment. The following  procedures may be used in the staging process: Chest x-ray: An x-ray of the organs and bones inside the chest. An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. CT scan (CAT scan):  A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body such as the  abdomen or pelvis, taken from different angles.  The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.  This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. MRI (magnetic resonance imaging):  A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). PET scan (positron emission tomography scan): A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body.  A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein.  The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body.  Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. Cystoscopy:  A procedure to look inside the bladder and urethra to check for abnormal areas.  A cystoscope is inserted through the urethra into the bladder.  A cystoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a tool to remove tissue samples, which are checked under a microscope for signs of cancer.EnlargeCystoscopy. A cystoscope (a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing) is inserted through the urethra into the bladder. Fluid is used to fill the bladder. The doctor looks at an image of the inner wall of the bladder on a computer monitor to check for abnormal areas. Proctoscopy: A procedure to look inside the rectum and anus to check for abnormal areas, using a proctoscope. A proctoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing the inside of the rectum and anus. It may also have a tool to remove tissue samples, which are checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. Biopsy: A biopsy may be done to find out if cancer has spread to the cervix. A sample of tissue is removed from the cervix and viewed under a microscope. A biopsy that removes only a small amount of tissue is usually done in the doctor’s office. A cone biopsy (removal of a larger, cone-shaped piece of tissue from the cervix and cervical canal) is usually done in the hospital. A biopsy of the vulva may also be done to see if cancer has spread there. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if  vaginal cancer spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually vaginal cancer cells. The disease is metastatic vaginal cancer, not lung cancer. These abnormal cells are not cancer. Vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VaIN) is grouped based on how deep the abnormal cells are in the tissue lining the vagina: VaIN 1: Abnormal cells are found in the outermost one third of the tissue lining the vagina. VaIN 2: Abnormal cells are found in the outermost two-thirds of the tissue lining the vagina. VaIN 3: Abnormal cells are found in more than two-thirds of the tissue lining the vagina. When VaIN 3 lesions are found in the full thickness of the tissue lining the vagina,  it is called carcinoma in situ. VaIN may become cancer and spread into the vaginal wall. In stage I,  cancer is only found  in the vaginal wall. In stage II, cancer has spread through the wall of the vagina to the tissue around the vagina. 
 
 
  
Cancer has not spread to the wall of the pelvis. In stage III, cancer has spread to the wall of the pelvis. Stage IV is divided into stage IVA and stage IVB: Stage IVA: Cancer may have spread to one or more of the following areas:The lining of the bladder.The lining of the rectum.Beyond the area of the pelvis that has the bladder, uterus, ovaries, and cervix. Stage IVB: Cancer has spread to parts of the body that are not near the vagina, such as the lung or bone. The lining of the bladder. The lining of the rectum. Beyond the area of the pelvis that has the bladder, uterus, ovaries, and cervix. The cancer may come back in the vagina or in other parts of the body. There are different types of treatment for  patients with vaginal cancer. The following types of treatment are used:SurgeryRadiation therapyChemotherapy New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials.ImmunotherapyRadiosensitizers Treatment for vaginal cancer may cause side effects. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Follow-up tests may be needed. Surgery Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Immunotherapy Radiosensitizers Different types of treatments are available for  patients with vaginal cancer. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials.    A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the  standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Surgery is a treatment option for both vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VaIN) and vaginal cancer. The following types of surgery may be used to treat VaIN: Laser surgery: A surgical procedure that uses a laser beam (a narrow beam of intense light) as a knife to make bloodless cuts in tissue or to remove a surface lesion such as a tumor. Wide local excision: A surgical procedure that  takes out the cancer and some of the healthy tissue around it. Vaginectomy: Surgery to remove all or part of the vagina. Skin grafts from other parts of the body may be needed to reconstruct the vagina. The following types of surgery may be used to treat vaginal cancer: Wide local excision: A surgical procedure that  takes out the cancer and some of the healthy tissue around it. Vaginectomy: Surgery to remove all or part of the vagina. Skin grafts from other parts of the body may be needed to reconstruct the vagina. Total hysterectomy: Surgery to remove the uterus, including the cervix.  If the uterus and cervix are taken out through the vagina, the operation is called a vaginal hysterectomy.  If the uterus and cervix are taken out through a large incision (cut) in the abdomen, the operation is called a total abdominal hysterectomy.  If the uterus and cervix are taken out through a small incision in the abdomen using a laparoscope, the operation is called a total laparoscopic hysterectomy.EnlargeHysterectomy. The uterus is surgically removed with or without other organs or tissues. In a total hysterectomy, the uterus and cervix are removed. In a total hysterectomy with salpingo-oophorectomy, (a) the uterus plus one (unilateral) ovary and fallopian tube are removed; or (b) the uterus plus both (bilateral) ovaries and fallopian tubes are removed. In a radical hysterectomy, the uterus, cervix, both ovaries, both fallopian tubes, and nearby tissue are removed. These procedures are done using a low transverse incision or a vertical incision. Lymph node dissection: A surgical procedure in which lymph nodes are removed and a sample of tissue is checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. This procedure is also called lymphadenectomy. If the cancer is in the upper vagina, the pelvic lymph nodes may be removed. If the cancer is in the lower vagina, lymph nodes in the groin may be removed. Pelvic exenteration: Surgery to remove the lower colon, rectum, bladder, cervix, vagina, and ovaries. Nearby lymph nodes are also removed.   Artificial openings (stoma) are made for urine and stool to flow from the body into a collection bag. After the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the surgery, some patients may be given radiation therapy after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy. Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the area of the body with cancer. Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated.  External and internal radiation therapy are used to treat vaginal cancer, and may also be used as
			 palliative therapy to relieve
			 symptoms and improve quality of life. Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing.     When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can affect cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. Topical chemotherapy for squamous cell vaginal cancer may be applied to the vagina in a cream or lotion. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Immunotherapy is a treatment that uses the patient’s immune system to fight cancer.  Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the body’s natural defenses against cancer. Imiquimod is an immune response modifier that is being studied  to treat vaginal lesions and is applied to the skin in a cream. Radiosensitizers are drugs that make tumor cells more sensitive to radiation therapy. Combining radiation therapy with radiosensitizers may kill more tumor cells. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, visit our Side Effects page. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer  treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first  to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials supported by NCI can be found on NCI’s clinical trials search webpage. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VaIN) may include the following: Surgery (laser surgery after biopsy). Surgery (wide local excision) with a skin graft. Surgery (partial or total vaginectomy) with or without a skin graft. Topical chemotherapy. Internal radiation therapy. A clinical trial of immunotherapy  (imiquimod) applied to the skin. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of stage I squamous cell vaginal cancer lesions that are less than 0.5 centimeters thick may include the following: External radiation 
therapy, especially for large tumors or the lymph nodes near tumors in the lower part of the vagina. Internal radiation therapy. Surgery (wide local excision or vaginectomy with vaginal reconstruction). Radiation therapy may be given after the surgery. Treatment of stage I squamous cell vaginal cancer lesions that are more than 0.5 centimeters thick may include the following: Surgery:For lesions in the upper third of the vagina, vaginectomy and lymph node dissection, with or without vaginal reconstruction. For lesions in the lower third of the vagina, lymph node dissection. Radiation therapy may be given after the surgery, which may include:External radiation therapy with or without internal radiation therapy.Internal radiation therapy.For lesions  in  the lower third of
the vagina, radiation therapy may be  given to lymph nodes near  tumors. For lesions in the upper third of the vagina, vaginectomy and lymph node dissection, with or without vaginal reconstruction. For lesions in the lower third of the vagina, lymph node dissection. External radiation therapy with or without internal radiation therapy. Internal radiation therapy. For lesions  in  the lower third of
the vagina, radiation therapy may be  given to lymph nodes near  tumors. Treatment of stage I vaginal adenocarcinoma may include the following: Surgery (vaginectomy and hysterectomy with lymph node dissection). This may be followed by vaginal reconstruction and/or radiation therapy. Internal radiation therapy. External radiation 
therapy may also be given to the lymph nodes near tumors in the lower part of the vagina. A combination of therapies that may include wide local excision with or without     lymph node dissection and internal radiation therapy. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of stage II, stage III, and stage IVA  vaginal cancer is the same for squamous cell cancer and adenocarcinoma. Treatment may include the  following: Internal and/or external radiation therapy to the vagina. Radiation therapy may also be given to the lymph nodes near tumors in the lower part of the vagina. Surgery (vaginectomy or pelvic exenteration) with or without radiation therapy. Chemotherapy given with  radiation therapy. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of stage IVB vaginal cancer is the same for squamous cell cancer and adenocarcinoma. Treatment may include the following: Radiation therapy as palliative therapy,             to relieve symptoms and improve the quality of life. Chemotherapy may also be given. Although no anticancer drugs have been shown to help patients with stage IVB vaginal cancer live longer, they are often treated with  regimens used for cervical cancer. For more information, see Cervical Cancer Treatment. For information about the treatments listed below, see the Treatment Option Overview section. Treatment of recurrent vaginal cancer may include the following: Surgery (pelvic exenteration). Radiation therapy. Although no anticancer drugs have been shown to help patients with recurrent vaginal cancer live longer, they are often treated with regimens used for cervical cancer. For more information, see Cervical Cancer Treatment. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. General information  about clinical trials is also available. For more information from the National Cancer Institute about  vaginal  cancer, see the following: Vaginal Cancer Home Page What Is Cervical Cancer? Lasers to Treat Cancer Computed Tomography (CT) Scans and Cancer Immune System Modulators HPV and Cancer For general cancer information and other resources from the National Cancer Institute, visit: About Cancer Staging Chemotherapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Radiation Therapy and You: Support for People With Cancer Coping with Cancer Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer For Survivors and Caregivers Physician Data Query (PDQ) is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database. The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine. Most summaries come in two versions. The health professional versions have detailed information written in technical language. The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language. Both versions have cancer information that is accurate and up to date and most versions are also available in Spanish. PDQ is a service of the NCI. The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). NIH is the federal government’s center of biomedical research.  The PDQ summaries are based on an independent review of the medical literature. They are not policy statements of the NCI or the NIH. This PDQ cancer information summary has current information about the treatment of vaginal cancer.  It is meant to inform and help patients, families, and caregivers. It does not give formal guidelines or recommendations for making decisions about health care. Editorial Boards write the PDQ cancer information summaries and keep them up to date. These Boards are made up of experts in cancer treatment and other specialties related to cancer. The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made when there is new information. The date on each summary ("Updated") is the date of the most recent change. The information in this patient summary was taken from the health professional version, which is reviewed regularly and updated as needed, by the PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board. A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another. Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory. Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients. During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about the effects of a new treatment and how well it works. If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard." Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Clinical trials can be found online at NCI's website. For more information, call the Cancer Information Service (CIS), NCI's contact center, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). PDQ is a registered trademark. The content of PDQ documents can be used freely as text. It cannot be identified as an NCI PDQ cancer information summary unless the whole summary is shown and it is updated regularly. However, a user would be allowed to write a sentence such as “NCI’s PDQ cancer information summary about breast cancer prevention states the risks in the following way: [include excerpt from the summary].” The best way to cite this PDQ summary is: PDQ® Adult Treatment Editorial Board. PDQ Vaginal Cancer Treatment. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Updated  <MM/DD/YYYY>. Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/types/vaginal/patient/vaginal-treatment-pdq.  Accessed <MM/DD/YYYY>. [PMID: 26389348] Images in this summary are used with permission of the author(s), artist, and/or publisher for use in the PDQ summaries only. If you want to use an image from a PDQ summary and you are not using the whole summary, you must get permission from the owner. It cannot be given by the National Cancer Institute. Information about using the images in this summary, along with many other images related to cancer can be found in Visuals Online. Visuals Online is a collection of more than 3,000 scientific images. The information in these summaries should not be used to make decisions about insurance reimbursement. More information on insurance coverage is available on Cancer.gov on the Managing Cancer Care page. More information about contacting us or receiving help with the Cancer.gov website can be found on our Contact Us for Help page. Questions can also be submitted to Cancer.gov through the website’s E-mail Us.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Hyper-CVAD - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/hyper-cvad
txt: This combination contains the chemotherapy drugs cyclophosphamide,  vincristine sulfate, doxorubicin hydrochloride (Adriamycin), methotrexate, and cytarabine and the steroid hormone dexamethasone. Combinations usually work better than single drugs because 
         different drugs kill 
         cancer 
         cells in different ways. Each of the drugs in this combination is approved by the 
         Food and Drug 
         Administration (FDA) 
         to treat cancer or conditions related to cancer. Hyper-CVAD 
         with methotrexate and cytarabine is used to treat:  Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (certain types).  Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (certain types).  Hyper-CVAD is given as hyperfractionated therapy, in which the total daily dose is divided into smaller doses and given more than once a day. This combination may also be used with other drugs or 
         treatments or to treat other types of cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Contact CCT - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/grants-training/training/contact
txt: The Office of the Director supports NCI training and career development programs to catalyze the development of a 21st century workforce capable of advancing cancer research through a scientifically integrated approach. Email: ncicct@mail.nih.gov Oliver Bogler, Ph.D.Read more about Dr. Bogler Director The Office of Training and Education focuses on enhancing the overall training experience of intramural postdoctoral and clinical fellows, graduate students, postbaccalaureate fellows, and interns at NCI. Email: ncicct-ote@mail.nih.gov Erika Ginsburg, M.A.Read more about Erika Ginsburg mariano@mail.nih.gov The Intramural Diversity Workforce Branch creates opportunities to enhance recruitment and retention, increase partnerships, and generate diversity awareness. Email: ncicctidwb@mail.nih.gov Joanne D'Silva, Ph.D., M.P.H.Read more about Joanne D'Silva dominiqua.griffin@nih.gov The Cancer Training Branch supports fellowships, research career development awards, and training/education research in all areas of cancer research, including cancer prevention, control, behavioral sciences, population sciences, and translational research, at universities and institutions across the country. Email: ncictbfoa@mail.nih.gov For diversity training and workforce diversity, please visit the Continuing Umbrella of Research Experiences, Early Investigator Advancement Program, and Cancer Moonshot Scholars. Nastaran Zahir, Ph.D.Read more about Nastaran Zahir The Center for Cancer Training
9609 Medical Center Dr.
2W118 MSC9707
Bethesda, MD 20892-9707Phone: 240-276-7400Fax: 240-276-5659Email: ncicct@mail.nih.gov Learn more about CCT
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Idarubicin Hydrochloride - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/idarubicinhydrochloride
txt: This page contains brief information about idarubicin hydrochloride
         and a collection of links to more information about the use of 
         this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Idarubicin hydrochloride
         is approved 
         to be used with other drugs to treat:  Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in adults.  Idarubicin hydrochloride
         is also being studied in the treatment of other types of
         cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Idarubicin Hydrochloride - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Find Clinical Trials for Idarubicin Hydrochloride - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/infrastructure/cancer-centers/find/iowaholden
txt: Michael Henry, PhD , Interim Director Iowa City,       Iowa Cancer Information Service: 1-800-237-1225 Visit Website The University of Iowa Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center is the state’s only NCI-Designated Comprehensive Cancer Center. Holden received its NCI cancer center designation in 2000 and was named as a comprehensive cancer center in 2001. The center is committed to decreasing the pain and suffering caused by cancer in Iowa, surrounding communities, and beyond. Its interdependent missions, based on research, clinical care, and education, are aimed at improving cancer prevention and treatment services. Holden draws on the expertise of `170 investigators from 41 departments at the University of Iowa. Clinical care, including cancer care, is provided by experts in more than 200 medical specialties at the University of Iowa Hospitals & Clinics and University of Iowa Stead Family Children's Hospital. The center's robust portfolio of clinical trials makes it the regional leader in cutting-edge care. For example, Holden is the only center in Iowa equipped to conduct phase 1 trials of new cancer therapies or cellular therapies for cancer. Holden is known for its highly collaborative approach to cancer research. Its labs share findings cooperatively, and researchers work closely across disciplines with clinical care teams to help solve real-world problems. It emphasizes the importance of converting discoveries in the lab into therapies for the patients it serves and ensuring that the center serves patients with cancer, both locally and statewide. Many of Holden’s cancer researchers choose to work at the University of Iowa because they are driven by a passion to see their studies improve the lives of patients. Notable Holden research achievements include a visionary, long-term commitment to the development of immunotherapy treatments and unparalleled expertise in the study of neuroendocrine tumors. Holden researchers are testing intravenously injected vitamin C (known as high-dose pharmacologic ascorbate) to support the treatment of pancreatic cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, glioblastoma multiforme, sarcoma, and other cancers. Their work has demonstrated over many years that vitamin C can make cancer cells more susceptible to the effects of chemotherapy and radiation, and clinical trials are translating those findings into new therapies. Holden investigators are at the forefront of basic research into a class of molecules known as toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) agonists which stimulate the immune system. People with PD-1 resistant metastatic melanoma who participated in a Holden-led phase 1b clinical trial combining a TLR9 agonist with pembrolizumab (Keytruda) had lasting responses. This research was spurred by earlier Holden discoveries that described the role of TLR9 agonists and demonstrated their anticancer effects. Holden is committed to studying the challenges residents of rural communities face with respect to cancer control. Research at Holden includes investigations into the rural disparities related to cancer care, such as the availability of treatments and health care providers, access to clinical trials, and transportation barriers. The center is identifying strategies that allow Critical Access Hospitals in rural areas to collect cancer surveillance data. This, in turn, allows Holden researchers to support the development of more effective cancer prevention and control initiatives. *This profile was provided by the University of Iowa Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Mihoko Kai, Ph.D. - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/about/contact/mihoko-kai
txt: Dr. Mihoko Kai manages a portfolio of grants focusing on tumor heterogeneity, stem cell biology, non-coding RNAs in the tumor microenvironment, and hormone signaling. Along with her DCB responsibilities, Dr. Kai is also a member of the Non-Endometrioid Uterine Cancer Working Group. In addition to her portfolio, Dr. Kai's scientific interests include understanding associations between the aging process and cancer, as well as the development of  better model systems for tumor microenvironment research. She says, “The improvements in single-cell RNA sequencing, genomic studies, and model systems have given us the ability to further understand new phenomenon in cancer."  Research Programs Dr. Kai also helps manage NCI cooperative agreement programs: Translational and Basic Science in Early Lesions (TBEL)  Acquired Resistance to Therapy Network (ARTNet)   Background Before coming to DCB, Dr. Mihoko was a principal investigator at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. She values the opportunities that DCB provides for bridging the gap between the basic and translational science research, as well as the opportunity to support research focusing on various tumor types.   
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: People in Health Care - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/managing-care/finding-cancer-care/providers
txt: Most cancer patients have a team of health care providers who work together to help them. This team may include doctors, nurses, social workers, pharmacists, dietitians, and other people in health care. Chances are that you will never see all of these people at the same time. In fact, there may be health care providers on your team who you never meet. Doctors 
While most people have two or more doctors, chances are you will see one doctor most often. An oncologist is a doctor who diagnoses and treats cancer. This doctor is the leader of your treatment team, who will meet and work closely with all of your health care providers. It’s important to let your doctor know how you’re feeling so your team can figure out whether you’re getting better or worse, decide if other drugs or treatments are needed, and ensure that you get the extra support you need. Nurses
Most likely, you will see nurses more often than other people on your treatment team. Besides giving medical care, nurses can answer questions, and offer hope and support. They may also suggest ways to talk with family and friends about your feelings. Nurses work with all other health care providers on your treatment team. Nurse Practitioner
You may also see nurse practitioners (NP) for your care. Nurse practitioners are registered nurses who have additional education and training in how to diagnose and treat disease. In cancer care, a nurse practitioner may help manage the primary care of patients and their families Pharmacists 
Pharmacists not only fill your prescriptions but also teach you about the drugs you’re taking (proper usage, side effects, foods to avoid, and warnings about sun exposure and the dangers of mixing drugs). Physician Assistant
Physician assistants, commonly called PAs, are health professionals licensed to do certain medical procedures under the guidance of a doctor. They may take medical histories, do physical exams, take blood and urine samples, care for wounds, and give injections and immunizations. Dietitians 
People with cancer often have trouble eating or digesting food. These problems can be a side effect of cancer drugs or treatments. Dietitians can help by teaching you about foods that are healthy, taste good, and are easy to eat. Oncology Social Workers 
Oncology social workers are trained to counsel you about ways to cope with the emotional and physical issues related to your cancer. They can also tell you about other resources that can help you deal with your cancer, such as community programs and support materials. In addition, they can connect you with financial, legal, and insurance services in your area. PsychologistsPsychologists can talk to you and your family about your worries and teach you ways to cope with these feelings and concerns. Let your doctor or nurse know if you want to talk with a psychologist who is trained to help people with cancer. Many social workers can also fill this role. Psychiatrists 
Psychiatrists are medical doctors who diagnose and prescribe drugs for mental and emotional disorders. They can also talk with you about your feelings and help you find the mental health services you need. Licensed Counselors and Other Mental Health Professionals
Licensed Professional Counselors (LPCs), pastoral care professionals, spiritual leaders, and other mental health counselors and professionals can help people deal with their feelings, worries, and concerns. Talk with your doctor or contact your local cancer center to find mental health professionals near you. Patient Educators
Patient or health educators help you and your family learn more about your cancer by finding information that fits your needs. Patient educators typically run the resource centers in hospitals and treatment centers. They can offer you tools to help you and your family understand your type of cancer, your treatment choices, and side effects. They can also give you tips for living with and beyond your cancer. Ask your doctor or nurse about talking to a patient educator. Patient Navigators
Patient navigators help guide a patient through the healthcare system. This may include help going through the screening, diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up care of cancer. They can help you talk to your doctor so you can get the information you need to make health care decisions. Patient navigators may also help set up appointments for doctor visits and medical tests and get financial, legal, and social support. They may also work with insurance companies, employers, case managers, lawyers, and others who may affect one's healthcare needs. Also called patient advocates. Occupational Therapists
Occupational therapists can help you regain, develop, and build skills that are important for day-to-day living. They can help you relearn how to do daily activities, such as bathing, dressing, or feeding yourself, after cancer treatment. Physical Therapists Physical therapists are trained to understand how different parts of your body work together. They can teach you about proper exercises and body motions that can help you gain strength and move better after treatment. They can also advise you about proper postures that help prevent injuries. Speech Therapists
Speech therapists can evaluate and treat any speech, language, or swallowing problems you may have after treatment.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Pediatric Immunotherapy Network (PIN) - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/research-programs/pin
txt: A killer T cell (blue) engaging a target cell, with cell-killing molecules (red) traveling along the target cell's cytoskeleton (green). The Pediatric Immunotherapy Network (PIN) is an initiative (supported by DCB and the NCI Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis (DCTD) through RFA-CA-22-016) that aims to address current challenges in pediatric immuno-oncology and accelerate the development of effective immunotherapies for pediatric solid tumors. PIN research projects are focusing on mechanisms of immune evasion in childhood cancers, the development of preclinical models for pediatric immuno-oncology, the discovery and validation of novel immunotherapeutic targets in pediatric tumors, and the design of new pediatric immunotherapy agents and treatment approaches. The overall goal of PIN is to develop and advance novel translational immunotherapy approaches for children and adolescents with solid tumors (including brain cancers).  PIN News  Contacts for PIN  Funded Projects  PIN News Contacts for PIN Funded Projects PIN News Future foundational and translational studies by PIN investigators will expand upon the work of the Pediatric Immunotherapy Discovery & Development Network (PI-DDN), which was funded by the Cancer Moonshot. Contacts for PIN For additional information about PIN, please contact Dr. Yin Liu and Dr. Lillian Kuo in DCB or Dr. Anju Singh and Dr. Marco Cardone in DCTD. Funded Projects  
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Riante Jones, M.S. - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/about/contact/riante-jones
txt: Riante Jones has expertise in health communication and helps communicate basic cancer research to the broader community. Some of his work includes creating promotional content for DCB’s Summer Undergraduate Research Program (SURP), as well as manage the DCB LinkedIN Showcase Page. Mr. Jones came to DCB because of the opportunity to be able to contribute to the basic cancer research community. Riante says “DCB’s work is pivotal in all layers of cancer research. To be able to communicate the research and progress that is occurring makes it very fulfilling.” Along with his work in DCB, Riante is a member of the NCI HBCU engagement Workgroup, The Early Science Investigator (ESI) Committee, and the DCB Intranet Working Group.  Background Prior to his work as a Health Communication Specialist for DCB, Riante was a Program Specialist in the Division of Cancer Control and Population Sciences (DCCPS).  Education M.S., Integrated Marketing Communication, Lasell College  B.S., Communication, Prairie View A&M University   
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Translational Genomics Research Institute - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/ccg/research/functional-genomics/ctd2/data-portal/translational-genomics-research-institute
txt:  Glioblastoma Multiforme Orthotopic Xenograft Transcriptome  Identification of Pathways Enriched with Condition-specific Statistical Dependencies Across Four Subtypes of Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM)  Quantified Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia RNA-seq Data  Glioblastoma Multiforme Orthotopic Xenograft Transcriptome Identification of Pathways Enriched with Condition-specific Statistical Dependencies Across Four Subtypes of Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) Quantified Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia RNA-seq Data Glioblastoma Multiforme Orthotopic Xenograft Transcriptome Principal Investigator
Michael E. Berens, Ph.D. ContactSen Peng Data Raw/Analyzed Data (GEO)  Analyzed Data (DCC)  This dataset contains the mRNA transcriptional profiles of 39 human primary glioblastoma orthotopic xenografts. The expression study was performed on the Agilent-014580 Whole Human Genome Microarray 4 X44K G4112F (GPL6480). This multi-pack (4X44K) formatted microarray represents a compiled view of the human genome as it is understood today. The sequence information used to design this product was derived from a broad survey of well-known sources such as RefSeq, Goldenpath, Ensembl, Unigene, and others. The resulting view of the human genome covers 41,000 unique genes and transcripts which have been verified and optimized by alignment to the human genome assembly and by Agilent's Empirical Validation process. The full raw data files are deposited in GEO (series GSE38814). The .gct matrix file contains log2 transformed, lowess normalized, and probe level expression values for each xenograft. Identification of Pathways Enriched with Condition-specific Statistical Dependencies Across Four Subtypes of Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) Principal Investigator
Michael E. Berens, Ph.D. ContactSen Peng ReferenceJung et al. (Nucleic Acid Res, 2014) Data Raw/Analyzed Data (DCC)  Dashboard Submission  Evaluation of Differential DependencY (EDDY) is a statistical test for the differential dependency relationship of a set of genes between two given conditions. For each condition, possible dependency network structures are enumerated and their likelihoods are computed to represent a probability distribution of dependency networks. The difference between the probability distributions of dependency networks is computed between conditions, and its statistical significance is evaluated with random permutations of condition labels on the samples. For this project, the CTD2 Center at the Translational Genomics Research Institute applied EDDY to the gene expression data of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) to reveal the functional difference between the four subtypes of GBM - Proneural (PN), Neural (N), Mesenchymal (MES) and Classical (CL).  The results show that the proposed method can identify novel gene sets that could not be found with Gene Set Enrichment Analysis, which is considered a representative method of considering only differential expressions, while providing many results specific to the subtypes of GBM. Gene expression data of GBM (AgilentG4502A_07; Level 3) obtained from TCGA were used for these analyses. Quantified Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia RNA-seq Data Principal Investigator
Michael E. Berens, Ph.D. ContactSen Peng Data Analyzed Data (DCC)  Many applications analyze quantified transcript-level abundances to make inferences.  Having completed this computation across the large sample set, the CTD2 Center at the Translational Genomics Research Institute presents the quantified data in a straightforward, consolidated form for these types of analyses. After downloading RNA-seq data for 935 cell lines from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE), transcript-level abundance was quantified using Salmon1. All data were aligned using Salmon 0.4.2 using Homo Sapiens GRCh37.74 for reference. Raw BAM files used to generate this data is avaliable at GDC. The resulting 935 quantification files, named by sample ID, have 4 columns for ensemble gene ID, length, number of reads, and transcripts per million (TPM). Other Salmon arguments were "--libType IU" (inward, unstranded).
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: CCCT - NCTN Steering Committees - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/ccct/steering-committees/nctn
txt: National Clinical Trials Network (NCTN) steering committees are committed to increasing the exchange of information at an early stage of clinical trial development and the efficiency of clinical trial collaboration. NCTN clinical trial concepts should be submitted to the Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program (CTEP) PIO. Before submitting a clinical trial concept, please refer to the NCTN Steering Committee Concept Submission Guidelines. Evaluate and prioritize clinical trial concepts to be conducted through the National Clinical Trials Network (NCTN) or NCI Clinical Oncology Program (NCORP) at monthly meetings. Share information at an early stage of trial development  Review and update strategic priorities for a given disease or research area and review accrual to ongoing trials approximately annually  Assess the strength of the clinical trial portfolio and its alignment with the strategic priorities  Convene clinical trial planning meetings to plan trials and address other trial-related issues as needed  Form task forces or working groups when needed to focus on a specific disease or issue  NCTN steering committees are made up of the following representatives: NCTN group disease committees representatives  NCORP representatives  Community oncologists  Specialized Programs of Research Excellence (SPORE) representatives  Consortia representatives (if NCI –funded Consortium in disease area)  Biostatisticians  Patient advocates  Up to four Special Clinician/other Experts as needed  NCI staff  The NCTN enterprise, consisting of the NCTN Groups, Scientific Steering Committees (SSCs), and the NCI, have set disease-specific strategic priorities. These priorities should be used to inform concept submissions, so the two are well aligned. Rosters for each disease-specific SC, as well individual strategic priorities, can be found on each of the NCTN Disease-Specific Steering Committee pages: Brain Malignancies  Breast Cancer  Gastrointestinal  Genitourinary  Gynecologic Cancer  Head and Neck  Leukemia  Lymphoma  Myeloma  Pediatric and Adolescent Solid Tumor  Pediatric Leukemia and Lymphoma  Thoracic Malignancy 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Acquisition Notices for NCI's FFRDC - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/contracts/fnlcr-acquisitions/acquisition-notices
txt: All formal announcements concerning all contract competition (including FNLCR) will be announced at minimum, to SAM.gov. Information posted to SAM.gov takes precedence over information provided on this website. Please be advised this website does not serve as the government's official government-wide point of entry (GPE). Type: Solicitation (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SN-MOSB-75N91020R00062-26 Title: Solicitation for the NCI's Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Solicitation (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SN-MOSB-75N91020R00062-26 Title: Solicitation for the NCI's Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Solicitation (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SN-MOSB-75N91020R00062-26 Title: Solicitation for the NCI's Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Solicitation (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SN-MOSB-75N91020R00062-26 Title: Solicitation for the NCI's Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Solicitation (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SN-MOSB-75N91020R00062-26 Title: Solicitation for the NCI's Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SN-MOSB-75N91020R00062-28 Title: Special Notice Announcing the Pre-Proposal Conference for the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Solicitation (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SN-MOSB-75N91020R00062-26 Title: Solicitation for the NCI's Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Solicitation (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SN-MOSB-75N91020R00062-26 Title: Solicitation for the NCI's Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Solicitation (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SN-MOSB-75N91020R00062-26 Title: Solicitation for the NCI's Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-27 Title: Request for Information (RFI) for the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Solicitation (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SN-MOSB-75N91020R00062-26 Title: Solicitation for the NCI's Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Solicitation (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SN-MOSB-75N91020R00062-26 Title: Solicitation for the NCI's Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Presolicitation (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SN-MOSB-75N91020R00062-25 Title: Pre-Sol Notice supporting the NCI's Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-24 Title: Posting of the DRFP2 Comments for the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) supporting the NCI Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-23 Title: Request for Information (RFI) for the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC) for Operation of the Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Extends the due date from March 1st 2022, to March 4th 2022 Type: Special Notice (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-23 Title: Request for Information (RFI) for the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC) for Operation of the Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-22 Title: Request for Information (RFI) for NCI's FFRDC: Draft Section M Small Business Participation Language Type: Special Notice (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-21 Title: Announcement for the release of the DRFP2 for the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) supporting the NCI Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-20 Title: Posting of the Health, Safety, and Security Policy & Program Description Document and Facilities Operation Manual for the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) supporting the NCI Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/FNLCR Type: Special Notice (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-19 Title: Posting of the DRFP Comments for the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) supporting the NCI Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-18 Title: Announcement the release of the RFP for the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) supporting the NCI Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-17 Title: Posting of Informational Resources on the Acquisition Portal for the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) supporting the NCI Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-16 Title: Posting of Redacted FFRDC SOW for the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) Operational Task Order supporting the NCI Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Draft RFP (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-13 Title: Request for Information (RFI) for the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-15 Title: Special Notice Announcing Information from the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Previously Held Industry Day Type: Draft RFP (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-13 Title: Request for Information (RFI) for the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-14 Title: Special Notice Announcing Industry Day for the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Draft RFP Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-13 Title: Request for Information (RFI) for the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SN-MOSB-75N91020R00062-12 Title: Redacted Annual Report supporting the NCI Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SN-MOSB-75N91020R00062-11 Title: Posting of Redacted FFRDC Contract and National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) Operational Task Order supporting the NCI Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SN-MOSB-75N91020R00062-10 Title: Special Notice for Industry Day for the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-7 Title: Request for Information (RFI) for the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Save the date for our Industry Day on April 8th! This remote event will feature live speakers and is your best opportunity to learn more about the Frederick National Labs! For more information including the agenda and how to register, go to https://events.cancer.gov/nci/ffrdc-industryday . Thank you to all who responded to the Request for Information (RFI) for the Statement of Work (SOW). Your valuable input is being put to use in revising and improving a document critical to our success. Next, we intend to release the draft version of the Request for Proposals (RFP) in the Spring. The Government is looking forward to industry’s feedback here as well, so keep a look out. This will help pave the way for the RFP in Fall/Winter of this year. If you are interested in collaborating with other industry partners, then consider joining the interested parties list. NCI can help support large and small businesses to partner, create teaming arrangements and subcontract relationships. Interested organizations should have an authorized official send an email to FNLCR_ACQinfo@mail.nih.gov and let us know a bit about you! Organizations Name and Duns  If you would like to be listed as a potential Prime Contractor, Subcontractor or as part of a Teaming Arrangement.  Brief statement of capabilities and relevant NAICS codes  Point of contact's name, title and email address  This information will be shared with all other interested parties only via email! Participation in the Interested Parties list is not a requirement to participation in the competition. Your decision to participate, or not, will not in any manner preclude you, prohibit you, restrict you, or result in unfavorable treatment concerning your future participation in the acquisition process. Nor will it in any manner aid you, advance you, increase your opportunity, or result in favorable or preferential treatment concerning your future participation in the acquisition process. Disclaimer:
Do not include proprietary, business sensitive, or other similar types of information on this website. If you have any questions, or wish to edit or remove your content at any time, please email us at FNLCR_ACQinfo@mail.nih.gov. Type: Special Notice (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-6 Title: Special Notice Announcing Industry Day for the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-5 Title: Request for Information (RFI) for the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-6 Title: Special Notice Announcing Industry Day for the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-2 Title: Request for Information (RFI) for the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Sources Sought (Amended) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SBSS-MOSB-75N91020R00062-3 Title: Small Business Sources Sought Notice for NCI's FFRDC Type: Sources Sought (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SS-MOSB-75N91020R00062-4 Title: Sources Sought Notice for NCI's FFRDC Type: Sources Sought (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SBSS-MOSB-75N91020R00062-3 Title: Small Business Sources Sought Notice for NCI's FFRDC Type: Special Notice (Updated) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-1 Title: Request for Information (RFI) for the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) Type: Special Notice (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-RFI-MOSB-75N91020R00062-1 Title: Request for Information (RFI) for the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) On September 11, 2020, the Government posted a Special Notice ending the prior competition, Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SNupdate-MOSB-0000-42-1 entitled, "Update on the Re-Competition of the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC) contract", and posted a Special notice opening the new competition, Notice Number: 75N91020R00062 entitled "Special Notice Announcing Re-competition of the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC) Contract" Type: Special Notice (Original) Notice Number: 75N91020R00062 Title: Special Notice Announcing Re-competition of the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC) Contract Type: Special Notice (Original) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SNupdate-MOSB-0000-42-1 Title: Update on the Re-Competition of the National Cancer Institute’s Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC) contract. Type: Special Notice (amendment) Notice Number: HHS-NIH-NCI-SNupdate-MOSB-0000-42 Title: Update on the Re-Competition of Operations and Technical Support for the National Cancer Institute's Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)/Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) To provide clarification to the Amendment posted to FedBizOpps Announcement: HHS-NIH-NCI-SNupdate-MOSB-0000-42, the Government is providing the following additional information to the public. On 30 Sep 2016, the NCI announced a suspension of the re-competition of the FFRDC contract. NCI halted its re-competition process for a deliberative assessment of its acquisition planning approach. Since the re-competition was announced on May 27, 2015, there have been a number of significant developments for the mission of the National Cancer Institute affecting the work the FFRDC performs on behalf of NCI and other NIH institutes. For example, the FFRDC has been rapidly responding to emerging health crises, including Ebola and Zika. The FFRDC was tasked with producing an experimental Zika vaccine for clinical trial use, a process expected to continue through the 2017 calendar year. In December 2016, President Obama signed into law the 21st Century Cures Act, which includes the Beau Biden Cancer Moonshot℠ (Cancer Moonshot). The new law authorizes $1.8 billion over seven fiscal years, beginning with FY17, for Cancer Moonshot. Another bill, also signed into law in December 2016, appropriated the first $300 million for this purpose. NCI is carefully evaluating the ways in which Cancer Moonshot and other developments will affect how the FFRDC is mobilized and responsive to these urgent, national priorities. To that end, FFRDC operations are moving forward with a short-term, sole source contract with Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., for one year, which can be extended one year at a time up to a total of five years. The Government plans to resume the re-competition process for a long-term FFRDC contract upon award of this sole source contract, ensuring the follow-on requirement is executed using full and open competition to the fullest extent possible. To provide clarification to the Amendment posted to FedBizOpps Announcement: HHS-NIH-NCI-SNupdate-MOSB-0000-42, the Government is providing the following additional information to the public. In 1972, the Frederick Cancer Research Center (FCRC) began operations under the authority of The National Cancer Act of 1971. The National Science Foundation (NSF) notified the National Institutes of Health (NIH) that the FCRC was officially designated as a Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC) in 1975. Now known as the Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR), the FFRDC is sponsored by the NIH through the National Cancer Institute (NCI). NCI manages, administers, monitors, funds, and is responsible for the overall use of the FFRDC. In May of 2016, NIH approved the continued sponsorship of the FFRDC mission for an additional 5 years, through May 2021, in accordance with Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR) governing FFRDC operations. This 5-year periodic review is required for all FFRDCs to ascertain the need for on-going research and comprehensively determine if that need continues to exist. All previous determinations to continue the sponsorship of the FFRDC have been approved since the FFRDC came into existence in 1975. The present contract to operate the lab runs through Sept. 25, 2018. On 30 Sep 2016, the NCI announced a suspension of the re-competition of the FFRDC contract. NCI has halted the re-competition process for a deliberative assessment of its acquisition planning approach. Further information will be posted to FedBizOpps as it becomes available, but the operations of the lab will continue unabated and the contract re-competition will resume at a later date.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Christina George, M.S. - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/about/contact/christina-george
txt: Christina George manages R03, R15, and R50 grants related to the tumor microenvironment.  Background Prior to DCB, Ms. George had experience in drug discovery in both academia and industry. Most recently,  she supported the Congressionally Directed Medical Research Programs (CDMRP) as a scientific manager of multiple medical research programs. She came to DCB because she was interested in supporting work in cancer biology and changing the lives of patients.  Education M.S., Basic Medical Science, Wayne State University  B.S., Biochemistry/Biotechnology, Michigan State University  
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Drugs Approved for Endometrial Cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/endometrial
txt: This page lists cancer drugs approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for endometrial cancer. The list includes generic names and brand names. The drug names link to NCI's Cancer Drug Information summaries. There may be drugs used in endometrial cancer that are not listed here. Dostarlimab-gxly  Jemperli (Dostarlimab-gxly)  Keytruda (Pembrolizumab)  Lenvatinib Mesylate  Lenvima (Lenvatinib Mesylate)  Megestrol Acetate  Pembrolizumab    Drug Combinations Used in Endometrial Cancer  CARBOPLATIN-TAXOL 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Research Areas: Causes of Cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/causes
txt: Many things may cause cancer, including exposure to certain substances, specific behaviors, age, and inherited genetic mutations. Cancer can be caused by many things, including exposure to cancer-causing substances, certain behaviors, age, and inherited genetic mutations. Studying the causes of cancer helps researchers understand the process by which normal cells are transformed into cancer cells and identify genetic, environmental, and behavioral risk factors for cancer. This knowledge can lead to new ways of preventing and treating the disease. Research on the causes of cancer also creates opportunities to improve public health, not only by identifying cancer risk factors in populations, but also by providing data that regulatory agencies can use to set safety standards or reduce exposure to toxins that are found to be associated with cancer. Findings from this area of research can also be used to inform technological advances, such as safer computed tomography (CT) scans and risk-reducing surgeries. Researchers use many different approaches to identify potential causes of cancer, from cell-based and animal studies to human observational studies. Research in basic cancer biology can reveal the mechanisms by which biological, chemical, and physical carcinogens initiate and promote cancer. Genetic analyses, such as genome-wide association studies, exome sequencing, and whole-genome sequencing, allow researchers to identify genetic changes that may be associated with cancer risk. Epidemiological approaches—including cohort studies, case-control studies, exposure-assessment studies, family studies, and genomic studies—are used to identify possible causes of cancer and study the patterns of risk in large populations. Another approach, known as descriptive epidemiology, characterizes trends in cancer incidence and mortality within a given population, between populations over time, and in relation to overall patterns of exposure in populations to yield clues that may point researchers to cancer causes and risk factors. This type of research can also identify emerging trends in cancer incidence. NCI supports a broad variety of research that aligns with the goals of the National Cancer Plan. Read about the plan and explore each goal. Advances in technology are improving how we determine and measure risk factors, enabling researchers to store and access findings in online databases, and allowing teams of investigators worldwide to pool data on an unprecedented scale. Multidisciplinary research teams are increasingly common and often include a range of experts, including epidemiologists, physicians, computational biologists, statisticians, oncologists, toxicologists, and geneticists. Technological advances have also led to more accurate studies of substances in the environment suspected of causing cancer. Developing devices that can accurately measure environmental exposures and biochemical assays in biologic specimens that might be associated with cancer could improve researchers’ ability to identify cancer-causing agents. Identifying people at highest risk of cancer, such as those with an inherited susceptibility to cancer or those who have been exposed to carcinogens, creates opportunities to develop risk prediction models and allows health providers to focus prevention and screening interventions on those most likely to benefit. Demonstrating cause-and-effect relationships in population studies examining potential cancer risk factors is a challenge because there are often many possible explanations for observed associations between a risk factor and cancer. Establishing cause and effect can require studying a large group of people and/or following individuals over many months or years. Rare cancers and uncommon exposures, in particular, present challenges for researchers studying the causes of cancer. New statistical methods may be needed to improve the analysis of datasets of all sizes from these studies. Methodologic issues also pose challenges to determining whether substances in the environment, even those known to cause cancer in animals, actually cause cancer in humans. Researchers are changing how they assess the effect of diet on cancer, health. When studying certain exposures, such as dietary exposures, identifying which component is associated with an increased or decreased risk of cancer can also be a challenge. Retrospective studies have additional limitations, such as participants’ inability to accurately remember and report past exposures or exposure levels. There is a continual need for new and improved techniques for measuring risk factors and exposures to potential causes of cancer. For example, studies that estimate radiation exposures among an exposed population must also quantify the uncertainties inherent to those estimates. To identify cancer causes and risk factors that may be experienced by only a portion of the population, very large studies may be needed to have the statistical power required to establish an association. Investigating interactions between genes and environmental exposures that have been associated with cancer is a challenge because some of these studies involve enormous data sets and require sophisticated computational analyses. Once a causative agent has been identified, another challenge is figuring out how to reduce a person’s exposure or ameliorate its harmful effects. Although genome-wide association studies can point to chromosomal regions associated with cancer risk in certain populations, additional studies and analyses are needed to identify the specific genetic changes involved and to understand how they play a role in the development of cancer. Each year, NCI prepares a professional judgment budget to lead progress against cancer. NCI funds and conducts research on the causes of cancer. The intramural research program allows the institute to conduct studies that require long-term, sustained support and provides NCI with the flexibility to redirect resources, when necessary, to respond quickly to emerging public health concerns. NCI and NCI-funded researchers aim to understand the exposures and risk factors that cause cancer, as well as the genetic basis for cancer development. Studies conducted by the NCI Cohort Consortium, for example, seek to identify factors (including environmental, lifestyle, and genetic) that may influence cancer risk. The consortium is a partnership between intramural and extramural investigators that pools the large quantity of data and biospecimens necessary to conduct a wide range of cancer studies. The consortium consists of investigators responsible for more than 50 cohorts that include more than 7 million people in the United States and around the globe. Intramural and extramural investigators also seek to identify ways to translate these research findings into tangible benefits to prevent cancer, identify and monitor those at risk, and develop clinical and public health interventions. NCI’s Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics (DCEG) and the Epidemiology and Genomics Research Program in NCI’s Division of Cancer Control and Population Sciences (DCCPS) conduct and fund research to identify and evaluate a range of exposures and risk factors that may be associated with cancer, including: substances in the environment and workplace, such as chemicals and air and water pollutants. For example, the Diesel Exhaust in Miners Study found that heavy exposure to diesel exhaust is associated with an increased risk of lung cancer.  infectious agents, such as viruses and bacteria. For example, NCI investigators have studied human papillomavirus (HPV) over many decades, helping to define its role in the development of cervical and other cancers. This work has helped improve screening approaches and demonstrated the effectiveness of the HPV vaccine.  radiation, both ionizing and nonionizing. For example, DCEG investigators are involved in several studies of cancer incidence among children undergoing CT scans.  pharmaceutical agents and exogenous and endogenous hormones. For example, researchers involved in the DES Follow-Up Study are following women and their daughters, sons, and granddaughters who were exposed to diethylstilbestrol (DES) for adverse health effects, including cancer.  behavioral and lifestyle factors, such as diet and nutrition, tobacco use, alcohol use, energy balance, physical activity, obesity, cancer screening behavior, and sun protection. For example, DCCPS’s Behavioral Research Program funds the Transdisciplinary Research on Energetics and Cancer (TREC) Centers.  immune system status and inflammation. For example, the DCEG HIV/AIDS Cancer Match Study provides population-based data on cancer risk and trends among HIV-infected people in the United States.  A key question of great research interest is the role of environmental agents in causing breast cancer. In May 2021, NCI and the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences held a virtual scientific meeting, Breast Cancer and the Environment: Controversial and Emerging Exposures, to identify new research opportunities and approaches to address knowledge gaps. DCEG researchers and those funded by DCCPS are also studying risks of second primary cancers. Nearly one in five cancers occurs in an individual with a previous diagnosis of cancer, and these second cancers are a leading cause of morbidity and mortality among cancer survivors. Research on treatment, lifestyle, environmental, and medical history factors associated with second cancers is ongoing, as is research on genetic susceptibility to second cancers. Discovery points to new possibilities for future cancer treatments. NCI and NCI-funded investigators are also studying genetic factors that may predispose individuals to cancer and gene–environment interactions in cancer risk using approaches such as genome-wide association studies and whole genome scans. Changes in an individual’s genes, including gene mutations, genetic modifiers, and polymorphisms, can alter his or her lifetime risk of cancer. To explain the genetic factors that influence a person’s risk for cancer, NCI and NCI-funded investigators are: conducting human genetic studies to identify and validate key susceptibility genes and their modifiers using knowledge gained from gene expression profiles and protein “fingerprints”  identifying genetic and environmental factors that influence the cancer epigenome (i.e., chemical modifications to DNA that do not involve DNA sequence changes)  defining the role of inherited or acquired genetic alterations, in combination with lifestyle factors and environmental exposures (such as radiation and chemicals), as important determinants of an individual’s cancer susceptibility  identifying new tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes, and elucidating their mechanisms of action  identifying, mapping, and characterizing genes and chromosome regions that are involved in tumor initiation and progression  For example, investigators in DCEG’s Radiation Epidemiology Branch are partnering with investigators from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study to conduct a genome-wide association study of second cancers in childhood cancer survivors. NCI researchers are also studying a range of hereditary cancer syndromes that predispose affected individuals and their family members to cancer. These include inherited bone marrow failure syndromes, Li-Fraumeni syndrome, DICER1 syndrome, familial melanoma, and others. Studies of people with hereditary cancer syndromes help researchers understand the underlying biology of cancer risk and develop ways to improve the management of these disorders. Such studies may also, indirectly, provide insights into the genetic basis for noninherited, or sporadic, forms of cancers. That was the case with research on familial kidney cancer by W. Marston Linehan, M.D., of NCI's Center for Cancer Research (CCR). DCEG and CCR investigators are also studying cancer predisposition syndromes such as RASopathies, conditions caused by changes in genes in the RAS/MAPK pathway. People with RASopathy syndromes have a higher risk of developing cancer and may have developmental issues and cognitive and congenital disabilities. The RASopathies study team aims to understand how genetics and environmental factors contribute to cancer development in patients with these syndromes. The team also hopes to learn how to better screen for, detect, and treat these syndromes using these data. NCI supports and conducts research to understand the mechanisms by which external exposures and risk factors induce and promote cancer. NCI’s Division of Cancer Biology (DCB) supports research investigating the role of biological agents and host factors that contribute to cancer. DCB’s Cancer Immunology, Hematology and Etiology Branch, for example, funds research on the role of the microbiome in cancer development and the influence of aging on cancer susceptibility. DCB also supports research to understand mechanisms by which carcinogens initiate and promote tumor development. CCR researchers are trying to elucidate mechanisms that influence tumor initiation, promotion, and progression, including those associated with lifestyle, the environment, inflammation, the immune system, viruses, and host-tumor interaction. NCI’s Office of HIV and AIDS Malignancy (OHAM) coordinates and oversees NCI research programs that focus specifically on HIV/AIDS and AIDS-associated cancers. For example, OHAM’s AIDS and Cancer Specimen Resource is a biorepository for HIV-infected human biospecimens that serves as a resource for investigators conducting basic research in the pathogenesis of AIDS-related malignancies.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NCI/NIH Meeting Room - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/events/conferences/aacr-2022/nci-meeting-room
txt: Room 297 of the convention center Sunday, April 10, 2022 | 9:00 a.m.–5:00 p.m.  Monday, April 11, 2022 | 9:00 a.m.–5:00 p.m.  Tuesday, April 12, 2022 | 9:00 a.m.–5:00 p.m.  Wednesday, April 13, 2022 | 9:00 a.m.–12:00 p.m.  meet with your NCI program director to discuss your individual grant/review questions  schedule times to learn about new research initiatives at NCI and the overall grant application process  New investigators are especially encouraged to meet with program staff handling grant portfolios in their area of scientific interest. Researchers interested in meeting with their program directors should contact them ahead of AACR to arrange a time to meet.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/hormones/mht-fact-sheet
txt:  What is menopausal hormone therapy?  What are the health effects of menopausal hormone therapy?  Who should not take menopausal hormone therapy?  Are there alternatives for women who choose not to take menopausal hormone therapy?  What is menopausal hormone therapy? What are the health effects of menopausal hormone therapy? Who should not take menopausal hormone therapy? Are there alternatives for women who choose not to take menopausal hormone therapy? What is menopausal hormone therapy? Menopausal hormone therapy (MHT)—also called postmenopausal hormone therapy and hormone replacement therapy—is sometimes used to replace the natural hormones estrogen and progesterone in a woman’s body during and after menopause, when levels of these hormones drop. Providers may recommend MHT to relieve common symptoms of menopause, such as hot flashes and vaginal dryness, and to address long-term biological changes, such as bone loss (osteoporosis), that result from declining levels of estrogen and progesterone. Like most therapies, MHT has not only potential benefits but also possible harms. People should discuss the likely benefits and harms they might experience with their providers before deciding whether to use MHT and what form to use. MHT usually consists of estrogen alone or estrogen plus progestin, a synthetic form of progesterone. The hormones used in MHT are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and come from a variety of plants and animals or are made in a laboratory. The chemical structure of these hormones is similar to those of hormones produced by women’s bodies. MHT can be given in a variety of ways. When the goal is to treat hot flashes and other systemic symptoms or to prevent osteoporosis, it is usually given as a pill, but it can be also be given systemically through the skin (e.g., via a patch, gel, or spray) or via an implant. When the goal is to address genitourinary symptoms such as vaginal dryness, MHT (containing low-dose estrogen only) is applied directly in the vagina (as a cream or suppository). Which form of MHT is used depends on whether a woman has a uterus. Because estrogen, when used alone (i.e., without progestin) for systemic MHT, is associated with an increased risk of endometrial cancer, estrogen is used alone only in women who have had a hysterectomy. Women who have a uterus—that is, who have not had a hysterectomy—are generally prescribed estrogen plus progestin for systemic MHT. Vaginal estrogen to treat genitourinary symptoms is prescribed regardless of hysterectomy status. Non-FDA-approved hormone products, sometimes referred to as “bioidentical hormones,” are custom-mixed (or compounded) drugs that are sometimes sold without a prescription on the internet. Claims that these products are “safer” or more “natural” than FDA-approved hormonal products are not supported by credible scientific evidence. More information about these products can be found on FDA’s Menopause & Hormones: Common Questions fact sheet. What are the health effects of menopausal hormone therapy? Much of the evidence about the health effects of MHT comes from two randomized clinical trials that were sponsored by the National Institutes of Health as part of the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI): The WHI Estrogen-plus-Progestin Study, in which women with a uterus were randomly assigned to receive either a hormone pill containing both estrogen and progestin (Prempro) or a placebo. The median duration of treatment was 5.6 years.  The WHI Estrogen-Alone Study, in which women without a uterus were randomly assigned to receive either a hormone pill containing estrogen alone (Premarin) or a placebo. The median duration of treatment was 7.2 years.  Both trials were stopped early (in 2002 and 2004, respectively), when it was determined that both types of therapy were associated with specific health risks. Findings of follow-up studies of WHI participants and other studies have shown that MHT is associated with both potential benefits and potential harms (1). Potential benefits of MHT include: relief of hot flashes, night sweats, vaginal dryness, and painful intercourse with systemic and local estrogen or systemic estrogen plus progestin for as long as MHT is taken  lower risk of hip and vertebral fractures with systemic estrogen or estrogen plus progestin for as long as MHT is taken (2–5)  lower risk of breast cancer with systemic estrogen (3, 5, 6)  lower risk of death from breast cancer with systemic estrogen (6, 7)  Potential harms of systemic MHT include: increased risk of vaginal bleeding with estrogen plus progestin (8) that may require assessment by endometrial biopsy (because bleeding is a risk factor for uterine cancer)  increased risk of urinary incontinence with both estrogen alone and estrogen plus progestin (2, 9)  increased risk of dementia with both estrogen alone and estrogen plus progestin when taken by those 65 years or older (10–14)  increased risk of stroke, blood clots, and heart attack with estrogen alone and estrogen plus progestin for as long as MHT is taken (2–5)  increased risk of endometrial cancer in people with an intact uterus with estrogen alone  increased risk of breast cancer with prior use of estrogen plus progestin for at least a decade after use is discontinued (6, 15, 16)  increased breast density with estrogen plus progestin, making mammography less effective and also increasing breast cancer risk (17–20)  increased risk of death from lung cancer with estrogen plus progestin (21)  Importantly, MHT is not associated with an increased risk of death from all causes (7). Who should not take menopausal hormone therapy? Women who have had breast cancer in the past are often advised to avoid MHT because some studies suggest that it may increase the risk of breast cancer recurrence (22, 23). However, other studies have not shown an increased risk. For example, a Danish cohort study of postmenopausal women treated for early-stage breast cancer showed no increased risk of recurrence or mortality associated with the use of vaginal or systemic MHT (24). Many studies have also been done to investigate whether MHT is safe for women who have experienced premature or severe menopausal symptoms as a result of cancer treatments that reduce hormone levels. A 2020 clinical practice statement from the Society of Gynecologic Oncology concluded that the benefits of MHT are likely to outweigh the risks for most people with epithelial ovarian, early-stage endometrial, and cervical cancer as well as for people with BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutations or Lynch syndrome and no history of breast cancer (25). However, the statement recommended against the use of MHT in women with advanced endometrial cancer, uterine sarcoma, or endometrioid or low-grade serous ovarian cancer. Women who are seeking relief from hot flashes and vaginal dryness should talk with their health care provider about whether to take MHT, the possible risks of using MHT, what formulation might be most appropriate for them, and possible alternative ways to address their symptoms. FDA advises women to use MHT for the shortest time and at the lowest dose possible to control menopausal symptoms. Are there alternatives for women who choose not to take menopausal hormone therapy? Women who are concerned about the changes that occur naturally with the decline in hormone production that occurs during menopause can make changes in their lifestyle and diet to reduce the risk of certain health effects. For example, eating foods that are rich in calcium and vitamin D or taking dietary supplements containing these nutrients may help to prevent osteoporosis. Medications may be an option to reduce certain changes that come with menopause. For instance, three non-hormonal treatments are approved by the FDA to treat symptoms of menopause: fezolinetant (Veozah) and paroxetine (Brisdelle), to treat moderate to severe hot flashes associated with menopause, and ospemifene (Osphena), to treat moderate to severe pain with sexual activity due to menopause-associated vaginal changes. Other non-hormonal therapies suggested by the North America Menopause Society for relief of menopausal hot flashes include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, oxybutynin, gabapentin, and cognitive behavioral therapy (26). Bone loss can be prevented with several FDA-approved drugs, such as alendronate (Fosamax), raloxifene (Evista), and risedronate (Actonel). Some women seek relief from menopausal symptoms with complementary and alternative therapies. Some of these remedies contain phytoestrogens, which are estrogen-like compounds derived from plant-based sources such as soy products, whole-grain cereals, oilseeds (primarily flaxseed), legumes, or black cohosh. However, the North America Menopause Society does not recommend supplements, herbal remedies, or acupuncture for relief of hot flashes (26). A 2016 systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials of phytoestrogen-containing therapies found that some of these were associated with modest reductions in the frequency of hot flashes and vaginal dryness (27). According to the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health, there is little information on the long-term safety of the use of natural products for menopausal symptoms, and some can have harmful side effects or interact with other drugs a woman may be taking.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Using HCMI - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/ccg/research/functional-genomics/hcmi/using-hcmi
txt:  Human Cancer Model Initiative (HCMI) Searchable Catalog  Genomic Data Commons (GDC)  Informed Consent Template for HCMI  Protocols for Model Expansion  Human Cancer Model Initiative (HCMI) Searchable Catalog Genomic Data Commons (GDC) Informed Consent Template for HCMI Protocols for Model Expansion Human Cancer Model Initiative (HCMI) Searchable Catalog The HCMI Searchable Catalog is a continuously updated resource for querying the next-generation models developed by HCMI. Within the catalog, users can search available models by patient demographics, tumor, and model elements including age at diagnosis, sex, treatment information, clinical tumor diagnosis, primary site, clinical stage, and type of model (e.g., 3D-organoid, 2D-conditionally reprogrammed cells), etc. Each model page within the catalog provides a link to corresponding data at the Genomic Data Commons, when available. For additional assistance in navigating the HCMI Searchable Catalog, please see the HCMI Searchable Catalog User Guide. Genomic Data Commons (GDC) The models’ case-associated clinical, biospecimen, and molecular characterization datasets are harmonized and stored at NCI's GDC and can be accessed through GDC Data Portal as they become available. The GDC Data Portal provides users with web-based access to models’ case-associated open- and controlled-access data. Informed Consent Template for HCMI An example informed consent document that HCMI suggested sites use when collecting specimens from prospective project participants. This document helps ensure that patients considering donating tissue specimens to human genomics research programs recognize the risks and benefits of participation and understand the nature of their inclusion in the project. Protocols for Model Expansion Laboratory protocols for growing next-generation cancer models developed by Cancer Model Development Centers are available at American Type Culture Collection.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Dr. Patti Gravitt - Center for Global Health Deputy Director - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/cgh/about/contact/patti-gravitt-bio
txt: Patti Gravitt, Ph.D., M.S. Deputy Director, Center for Global Health Patti E. Gravitt, Ph.D., M.S., joined NCI as deputy director of the Center for Global Health in July 2021. In this role she leads implementation science efforts and provides scientific and programmatic direction across our research, training, partnership, and dissemination goals. Dr. Gravitt is a molecular epidemiologist whose research in human papillomavirus (HPV) and cervical cancer spans the translational spectrum from the natural history of genital infection across the lifespan to the translation of evidence-based prevention tools to low- and middle-income countries. Her efforts have contributed significantly to the evidence base regarding the efficacy of alternative cervical cancer screening strategies, being among the first to show an increase in screening coverage afforded by self-collected sampling and HPV testing and the relatively poor performance of visual inspection methods where intensive international technical assistance and training are not available. As an extramural researcher, Dr. Gravitt’s National Institutes of Health–funded research included the study of cervical cancer prevention in Peru’s Loreto region in the Amazon rainforest. In addition, the study identified approaches to engage health providers and the community in education, screening, and treatment. Most recently, Dr. Gravitt led a team of interdisciplinary scientists and screening implementers to use a systems-thinking approach to the design, implementation, and evaluation of World Health Organization–recommended, HPV-based screening algorithms. Through this work, she led the development of the Integrated Systems Praxis for Implementation Research (INSPIRE) methodology, which leverages systems thinking and participatory action research for shared decision-making and context adaptation of cancer control programs. Dr. Gravitt earned her Ph.D. in epidemiology from Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health and her M.S. in biology from University of North Carolina, Charlotte. In addition, she serves on several World Health Organization working groups related to HPV and cervical cancer elimination.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Integrative Therapies Editorial Board - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/publications/pdq/editorial-boards/cam
txt: This Board consists of experts in the fields of oncology, pharmacology, natural products, drug discovery and development, traditional Chinese medicine, acupuncture, and homeopathy. This Editorial Board meets quarterly to write and update information summaries on integrative, alternative, and complementary therapies for cancer. Jeffrey D. White, M.D., Editor-in-Chief
	National Cancer Institute
	Rockville, MD  Sangeeta Agarawal, R.N., M.S., C.A.S.
	Helpsy, Inc.
	Sunnyvale, CA  Ting Bao, M.D.
	Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
	Boston, MA  John A. Beutler, Ph.D.
	National Cancer Institute
	Frederick, MD  Bhaswati Bhattacharya, M.P.H., M.D., Ph.D.
	Weill Cornell Medical College
	New York, NY  Keith Block, M.D.
	Block Center for Integrative Cancer Treatment
	Skokie, IL  Heather Greenlee, N.D., Ph.D, M.P.H.
	Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
	Seattle, WA  Melinda Hollingshead, D.V.M. Ph.D.
	National Cancer Institute
	Frederick, MD  Wayne B. Jonas, M.D.
	Healing Works Foundation
	Alexandria, VA  Douglas Kinghorn, Ph.D.,D.Sc.
	Ohio State University
	Columbus, OH  Mikhail Kogan, M.D., R.C.S.T
	GW Center for Integrative Medicine
	Washington, DC  Nagi B. Kumar, Ph.D., R.D., FADA
	Moffitt Cancer Center
	Tampa, FL  Gabriel Lopez, M.D.
	M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
	Houston, TX  Weidong Lu, M.B., M.P.H., Ph.D.
	Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
	Harvard Medical School
	Boston, MA  Patrick J. Mansky, M.D.
	Frederick Memorial Hospital Regional Cancer Therapy Center
	Frederick, MD  Viraj Master, M.D. Ph.D. FACS 
	Emory University
	Atlanta, GA  Channing Paller, M.D.
	Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center
	at Johns Hopkins Hospital
	Washington, DC  Guido F. Pauli, PharmD, Ph.D.
	University of Illinois at Chicago
	Chicago, IL  Manoj Reddy, M.D.
	Integrative Oncology Working Group
	Dallas, TX  Hari Sankaran, M.D., M.Sc.
	National Cancer Institute
	Rockville, MD  Michael Schell, Ph.D.
	Moffitt Cancer Center
	Tampa, FL  Suzanna M. Zick, M.P.H., N.D.
	University of Michigan
	Ann Arbor, MI  
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Sorafenib improved progression-free survival in desmoid tumor study - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2018/sorafenib-desmoid-trial
txt:  Posted:
March 28, 2018  240-760-6600 Interim results from a randomized clinical trial for patients with desmoid tumors or aggressive fibromatosis (DT/DF) show that the drug sorafenib tosylate (Nexavar) extended progression-free survival compared with a placebo. Progression-free survival is the length of time patients lived before their disease worsened. Based on these interim results, the data and safety monitoring board overseeing the trial recommended that the primary results of the study be released. The trial was sponsored by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH); designed and conducted by researchers with the Alliance for Clinical Trials in Oncology (Alliance); and supported by Bayer HealthCare AG, which provided the study drug. “Sorafenib is a novel way of treating this rare cancer,” said lead investigator and study chair Mrinal M. Gounder, M.D., sarcoma medical oncologist at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York City. “The promising results of this phase 3 trial represent a paradigm shift in the approach to treatment of patients with desmoid tumors.” DT/DF are rare sarcomas estimated to occur in approximately 1,000 people each year in the United States, many of them relatively young. The sarcomas usually arise in the extremities or the abdomen and occasionally are associated with familial adenomatous polyposis or Gardner Syndrome. DT/DF are locally aggressive and can result in pain and decreased mobility, and they can invade vital organs or structures resulting in bowel obstructions and other serious complications. “Currently, there is no standard treatment for this rare disease, and the effectiveness of the treatments that are used for it—for example, surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy—is generally limited,” said Jeff Abrams, M.D., clinical director of NCI’s Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis. “But the interim results of this trial are promising and may offer a new treatment alternative.” Sorafenib is a targeted treatment, given in pill form, that interferes with the growth of cancer cells and new blood vessels that tumors need to grow. It is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of some patients with advanced kidney, liver, and thyroid cancer. The drug was chosen for this trial because in earlier retrospective studies of patients treated with sorafenib, desmoid tumors shrank, and patients had a reduction in pain and other symptoms. The phase 3 double-blind clinical trial, designated as A091105, enrolled 87 patients with DT/DF between March 2014 and December 2016. To be eligible, patients had to have disease that could not be removed surgically, that had grown, or that was causing symptoms and met specific criteria. Patients were randomly assigned to one of two treatment arms: one group received sorafenib (400 mg/day), and the other received a matched placebo. Patients in both groups continued treatment until their tumors grew or they experienced adverse events from treatment. Patients whose tumors progressed while in the study were informed of their treatment assignment, and those who had been receiving a placebo were allowed to receive sorafenib. The primary endpoint was progression-free survival. The trial was designed to target an improvement in median progression-free survival from six months for placebo to 15 months for sorafenib. Based on an interim analysis of the first 75 patients enrolled, the observed improvement in progression-free survival exceeded the trial-design target. Patients who received sorafenib were more likely to experience drug-related adverse events than those who received placebo. However, these side effects—which included fatigue, rash, gastrointestinal complications, infection, and hypertension—were generally not severe. Full details from this study will be presented at an upcoming scientific meeting and in a peer-reviewed publication. Alliance is one of four adult network groups in the NCI National Clinical Trials Network (NCTN). Bayer, the drug’s manufacturer, provided sorafenib for the trial and supported this study under a Clinical Trials Agreement with NCI for the clinical development of sorafenib. “This trial would not have been done without a large national network of investigators brought together through the NCI-supported NCTN program that was capable of enrolling patients with this very rare cancer,” said Dr. Abrams. “The success of this study shows how a partnership between Alliance, NCI, and Bayer HealthCare AG was able to provide the infrastructure and scientific knowledge to conduct a transformative trial in this rare tumor in patients across the United States and Canada,” added Gary K. Schwartz, M.D., co-chair of the Experimental Therapeutics and Rare Tumor Committee of Alliance and deputy director of the Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center of Columbia University in New York City. “We welcome the potentially practice-changing results from this NCI-sponsored trial in patients with desmoid tumors or aggressive fibromatosis and are looking forward to the full data presentation at an upcoming scientific congress,” said Svetlana Kobina, M.D., Ph.D., head of Global Medical Affairs, Oncology, at Bayer.According to the data and safety monitoring board’s recommendation, treatment assignments have been disclosed to patients still receiving treatment in the study and to their physicians. Patients who were receiving sorafenib in the trial can continue therapy, and those who were receiving placebo can receive sorafenib instead, if warranted, after these patients discuss treatment options with their physicians. For more information on the trial: http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02066181 About the National Cancer Institute (NCI): NCI leads the National Cancer Program and NIH’s efforts to dramatically reduce the prevalence of cancer and improve the lives of cancer patients and their families, through research into prevention and cancer biology, the development of new interventions, and the training and mentoring of new researchers. For more information about cancer, please visit the NCI website at cancer.gov or call NCI’s Contact Center (formerly known as the Cancer Information Service) at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit nih.gov.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Yin Liu, Ph.D. - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/about/contact/yin-liu
txt: Dr. Yin Liu has expertise and manages a grant portfolio in T cell exhaustion, Inflammation and tissue homeostasis in cancer, autoimmunity and immune-related adverse events (irAEs), lymphocyte migration, and T cell receptor signaling. Along with his work in DCB, Dr. Liu co-chairs a Cancer Moonshot Implementation Team.  Research Programs: Dr. Liu is involved in NCI research programs and a Cancer Moonshot initiative: Pediatric Immunotherapy Network (PIN)  Pediatric Immunotherapy Discovery and Development Network (PI-DDN)  NCI Serological Sciences Network for COVID-19 (SeroNet)  Background Prior to his work as a DCB program director, Dr. Liu was a scientific review officer at  the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases (NIAMS). Before working as a science administrator, he was a scientist in the NIH intramural research program, where he was involved in research about T cell receptor signaling, regulation of lymphocyte cytoskeleton and lymphocyte migration, and autoinflammatory diseases caused by genetic mutations. He came to DCB because of the opportunity to support the field of immunotherapy. Education Ph.D., Immunology, The Fourth Military Medical Institute  
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Oncology Product Research and Review for B.C. Oncologists - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/grants-training/training/at-nci/iotf/bc-oncologists
txt: This fellowship will train physicians in aspects of the drug, biologic, or device development and related issues and standards for assessing medical product safety and efficacy, to facilitate the movement of drugs, biologics, and devices from basic bench science to commercialization. Fellows will receive formal training and mentoring in the relevant federal statutes, regulations, principles and practices of FDA medical review, including issues related to the assessment of safety and efficacy, for limited human exposure in clinical trials, and later potential exposure to the broader patient population postmarketing approval. *Selection of fellows will be dependent upon the availability of funds. Applicants must be Board Certified in Oncology  Completion of clinical residency or clinical fellowship  U.S. citizenship or permanent residents, who have resided in the US for a total of three of the past five years  Proof of COVID-19 vaccination  NOTE: In order to be approved for logistical and physical access to NIH facilities and systems, candidates must be able to pass a Federal background check  using Standard Form-85 (read-SF-85).  Section 14 of the Form asks, "in the last year, have you used, possessed, supplied, or manufactured illegal drugs?" The questions pertain to the illegal use of drugs or controlled substances in accordance with Federal laws, even though permissible under state laws.  Federal laws supersede all state laws. Training and experience in clinical trial design, clinical pharmacology, pharmacoepidemiology, and the drug development process in the context of clinical research  Understanding the review process for regulatory pathways  Understanding of the various legal and regulatory aspects of cancer product development  Understanding of critical ethical issues and requirements in product research, development, and review, including protection of human research subjects and conflict of interest  Understanding of mechanisms of pathogenesis and cancer biology  This is a one-year program for up to three fellows per year. Fellows will choose one of the product or clinical divisions in FDA Centers for supplemental training. In a particular product or clinical division, these fellows will be matched to a pre-screened pool of principal investigators for regulatory research and review or to a branch chief for regulatory review and policies. These fellows will have the option to participate in translational research in the participating division. Fellows will undertake and participate in various regulatory activities of the chosen division. The division director or their designee will oversee these activities. During the training program, these fellows will be expected to attend and take and pass required tests in reviewer training and various courses offered by participating FDA Centers. Applications open May 1st, 2023. Please submit: Curriculum Vitae  Personal statement of research goals  Three letters of reference  For more detailed information and application guidelines view the NCI-FDA Research and Regulatory Review Fellowships Guidelines for Application (PDF) Send application materials to:
Chanelle Case Borden, Ph.D.
IOTF Program Manager
9609 Medical Center Dr.
Rm. 2W234, MSC 9707
Bethesda, MD 20892-9707
Office Phone: 240-276-5956
Email: IOTFfellowship@nih.gov While at FDA, fellows will each be assigned a mentor who will be a senior member of FDA scientific review staff. Review list of mentors and projects here. Burden Statement OMB No.: 0925-0761
Expiration Date: 07/31/2025 Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 60 minutes per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing he collection of information. An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a collection of information unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden to: NIH, Project Clearance Branch, 6705 Rockledge Drive, MSC 7974, Bethesda, MD 20892-7974, ATTN: PRA (0925-0761). Do not return the completed form to this address.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Cancer Nanotechnology Research - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/nano/research
txt: Biological processes, including ones necessary for life and those that lead to cancer, occur at the nanoscale. Thus, in fact, we are composed of a multitude of biological nano-machines. Nanotechnology provides researchers with the opportunity to study and manipulate macromolecules in real time and during the earliest stages of cancer progression. Nanotechnology can provide rapid and sensitive detection of cancer-related molecules, enabling scientists to detect molecular changes even when they occur only in a small percentage of cells. Nanotechnology also has the potential to generate entirely novel and highly effective therapeutic agents.  NCI Alliance for Nanotechnology in Cancer


Launched in 2004, the NCI Alliance for Nanotechnology in Cancer program is a comprehensive, structured effort, encompassing the public and private sector to converge multidisciplinary research in nanotechnology to advance the fight against cancer.  Nanotechnology Industrialization


The outlet by which technologies go from bench-to-bedside is by way of commercialized intellectual property. The translational success of Alliance investigators begins with this step.  Data Sharing


A well-organized, collaborative system of data sharing is critical in the translation of nanotechnology research into commercially viable therapeutics and diagnostics to treat patients.  Cancer Nanotechnology Plan


The Cancer Nanotechnology Plan serves as a strategic document to the NCI Alliance for Nanotechnology in Cancer as well as a guiding document to the cancer nanotechnology and oncology fields, as a whole.  Launched in 2004, the NCI Alliance for Nanotechnology in Cancer program is a comprehensive, structured effort, encompassing the public and private sector to converge multidisciplinary research in nanotechnology to advance the fight against cancer. The outlet by which technologies go from bench-to-bedside is by way of commercialized intellectual property. The translational success of Alliance investigators begins with this step. A well-organized, collaborative system of data sharing is critical in the translation of nanotechnology research into commercially viable therapeutics and diagnostics to treat patients. The Cancer Nanotechnology Plan serves as a strategic document to the NCI Alliance for Nanotechnology in Cancer as well as a guiding document to the cancer nanotechnology and oncology fields, as a whole.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Treatment Extends Survival for Women with Cervical Cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/cervical/research/gemcitabine-improves-survival
txt: Adapted from the NCI Cancer Bulletin. Making the chemotherapy drug gemcitabine part of the initial treatment of locally advanced cervical cancer and also part of therapy following primary treatment significantly improved survival for women with locally advanced cervical cancer, according to the results of an international, phase III clinical trial. Presented at the 2009 American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) Annual Meeting, the results have important implications for the treatment of women with cervical cancer in developing countries, where 70 to 80 percent of women with the disease are diagnosed at a locally advanced stage due to a lack of widespread screening programs, said lead investigator Alfonso Dueñas-González, M.D., Ph.D., of the National Cancer Institute of Mexico. More than 500 women with stage IIB to stage IVA cervical cancer--from countries as disparate as Pakistan and Panama--participated in the trial. They were randomly assigned to the experimental treatment arm, which included cisplatin and gemcitabine with concurrent external-beam radiation therapy, followed by brachytherapy and adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine and cisplatin. Women in the standard treatment group received cisplatin and concurrent external-beam radiation therapy followed by brachytherapy alone. Approximately 75 percent of women who received the experimental treatment did not experience progression of their disease 3 years after treatment, compared with 65 percent of women who received standard treatment. Overall survival was also improved, with 78 percent of women in the experimental treatment arm alive after 3 years compared with 69 percent of women in the standard treatment arm. The research team had expected more toxicity with the addition of gemcitabine, and that is what they saw. "Overall, the frequency of grade III and IV toxicities was higher in the experimental arm, mainly hematological toxicity," Dr. Dueñas-González said. Grade IV toxicities were low overall, he added, and generally toxicities in the experimental arm were "tolerable and manageable." The trial "in all likelihood defines a new standard of care" for patients with locally advanced cervical cancer, said Dr. Eric Winer, chief of the Division of Women's Cancers at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute. Longer-term data were subsequently published in the May 1, 2011, Journal of Clinical Oncology (see the journal abstract).
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NCI Helps Accelerate Telehealth Research for Cancer Care - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2022/telehealth-centers-of-excellence-awards
txt:  Posted:
August 18, 2022  240-760-6600 NCI, part of the National Institutes of Health, will award $23 million to four academic institutions to establish centers of excellence that will conduct research on the role of telehealth in delivering cancer-related health care, a practice that became more prevalent during the COVID-19 pandemic. The awards will establish NCI’s Telehealth Research Centers of Excellence (TRACE) initiative, which is being supported by the Cancer MoonshotSM, a White House initiative first launched in 2016 and reignited by President Biden in 2022 to accelerate the rate of progress against cancer. The awards are to be distributed over five years, pending availability of funds. “One of the Cancer Moonshot goals is to make the cancer experience less burdensome for patients and their families and caregivers,” said Katrina Goddard, Ph.D., director of NCI’s Division of Cancer Control and Population Sciences (DCCPS). “We are awarding these centers of excellence to better understand how telehealth can contribute to improved health outcomes across the cancer care continuum.” Telehealth is health care provided by doctors and other providers from a distance using electronic means, such as by phone, email, text message, or video conference. During the pandemic, the use and availability of telehealth skyrocketed in primary and specialty care, including cancer care. However, little is understood about how best to use and sustain telehealth in providing cancer-related care. “These centers will address important gaps in telehealth and cancer-related care delivery,” said Robin C. Vanderpool, Dr.P.H., chief of the Health Communication and Informatics Research Branch in DCCPS. “We need to establish an evidence base for using this technology to deliver health care in oncology and make it part of routine care. In addition, these centers will explore opportunities for scalability and dissemination of their cancer-related telehealth interventions beyond their own health systems.” The research being undertaken by the four centers will study the role of telehealth in fields from prevention to screening and diagnosis to treatment and survivorship. Each center will be led by an academic institution that has assembled diverse teams of researchers to conduct large trials in real-world clinical settings such as hospitals, cancer centers, oncology practices, and primary care offices. These are the four funded centers: The Telehealth Research and Innovation for Veterans with Cancer (THRIVE) Telehealth Research Center: Led by NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York City, this center will work with the Veterans Health Administration to examine how social factors such as race and ethnicity, poverty, and rural residence affect the delivery of telehealth for cancer care.  The Scalable Telehealth Cancer Care (STELLAR) Center: Led by Northwestern University, Evanston, Ill., this center will focus on using telehealth to extend health services to cancer survivors aimed at reducing risk behaviors such as smoking and physical inactivity.  The University of Pennsylvania Telehealth Research Center of Excellence (Penn TRACE): Led by the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, this center will use communication science and behavioral economics to compare the effectiveness of multiple telehealth strategies on shared decision-making for lung cancer screening, and to improve timely access to comprehensive molecular testing for advanced lung cancer.  The Making Telehealth Delivery of Cancer Care at Home Effective and Safe (MATCHES) Telehealth Research Center: Led by Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSK), New York City, this center will study the effectiveness of a remote monitoring system called MSK@Home for patients receiving systemic treatments for prostate and breast cancer.  In addition to developing innovative ways to use telehealth in cancer care, the centers will focus on identifying and addressing telehealth-related disparities among vulnerable populations, including racial and ethnic groups, rural residents, older adults, people who are uninsured or low-income, people who are socially isolated, and people who have limited digital literacy. All four centers are also committed to training the next generation of telehealth-focused researchers. “These centers will be at the cutting edge of some amazing breakthroughs by creating sustainable and effective telehealth options tailored specifically for cancer care,” said Roxanne E. Jensen, Ph.D., a program director in the Outcomes Research Branch in DCCPS who is overseeing the TRACE initiative with Dr. Vanderpool. “This work will pave the way for having healthcare delivery look a lot different for cancer patients over the next five to 10 years, and that's really exciting and in alignment with the goals of the Cancer Moonshot initiative.” About the National Cancer Institute (NCI): NCI leads the National Cancer Program and NIH’s efforts to dramatically reduce the prevalence of cancer and improve the lives of cancer patients and their families, through research into prevention and cancer biology, the development of new interventions, and the training and mentoring of new researchers. For more information about cancer, please visit the NCI website at cancer.gov or call NCI’s contact center, the Cancer Information Service, at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237). About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit nih.gov.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: TARGET Molecular Characterization Platforms - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/ccg/research/genome-sequencing/target/using-target-data/technology
txt: Researchers working at a large-scale sequencing center.  ALL Phase 1  ALL Phase 2 (Expansion)  ALL Phase 3 (ALAL)  AML  AML Induction Failure  Kidney - Wilms Tumor  Kidney - Clear Cell Sarcoma  Kidney - Rhabdoid Tumor  Neuroblastoma  Osteosarcoma  Model Systems  ALL Phase 1 ALL Phase 2 (Expansion) ALL Phase 3 (ALAL) AML AML Induction Failure Kidney - Wilms Tumor Kidney - Clear Cell Sarcoma Kidney - Rhabdoid Tumor Neuroblastoma Osteosarcoma Model Systems Below are the technologies that Therapeutically Applicable Research to Generate Effective Treatments (TARGET) used over the years. The technologies and protocols varied for each disease project type. All nucleic acid samples used in TARGET projects were quality tested for consistency using PicoGreen quantification and short tandem repeat genotyping methods, regardless of where the nucleic acid was originally extracted. ALL Phase 1 Clinical ALL Phase 2 (Expansion) Clinical Gene Expression ALL Phase 3 (ALAL) AML Clinical AML Induction Failure Clinical Annotation Kidney - Wilms Tumor Clinical Annotation Kidney - Clear Cell Sarcoma Clinical Kidney - Rhabdoid Tumor Clinical Annotation Neuroblastoma Clinical Annotation Osteosarcoma Clinical Annotation Model Systems DNA Prep
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: NCI Support for the Cancer Research Enterprise Infographic - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/grants-training/nci-bottom-line-blog/nci-support-for-cancer-research-enterprise
txt: 
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Lauren – Childhood Cancer Survivor - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/childhood/childhood-cancer-data-initiative/stories/lauren
txt: Lauren hopes that data sharing can speed the development of targeted cancer treatments that have fewer lifelong effects for children. Student, Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Temple University  Childhood Cancer Survivor  Lauren (she/her) often attributes her survival of childhood cancer to her positive outlook. At 14, she was diagnosed with advanced neuroblastoma. Although enduring treatment was sometimes difficult, her hospital room was always a place of hope. Part of Lauren’s treatment in 2012 included a new therapy with monoclonal antibodies that specifically targeted cancer cells. Targeted therapies have the potential to treat cancer with fewer harmful side effects, and data sharing initiatives like CCDI can speed their development. “Continued collection of data can help researchers work toward creating more targeted and less toxic treatments so that future patients can survive cancer without needing to face lifelong effects,” Lauren said. During and after treatment, Lauren shared her story in media interviews and on Capitol Hill to support childhood cancer research. Now age 25 with no evidence of disease, she explores her home city of Philadelphia when not absorbed in her medical school studies.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Childhood Bladder Cancer - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/types/bladder/childhood
txt: Childhood bladder cancer is a very rare type of cancer that forms in the tissues of the bladder. The bladder is a hollow, balloon-shaped organ in the lower part of the abdomen that stores urine. The bladder has a muscular wall that allows it to get larger to store urine made by the kidneys, and to shrink to squeeze urine out of the body. There are two kidneys, one on each side of the backbone, above the waist. The bladder and kidneys work together to remove toxins and wastes from the body  through urine: Tiny tubules in the kidneys filter and clean the blood. These tubules take out waste products and make urine. The urine passes from each kidney through a long tube called a ureter into the bladder. The bladder holds the urine until it passes through the urethra and leaves the body. Urothelial carcinoma (also called transitional cell carcinoma) is cancer that begins in the urothelial cells, which line the urethra, bladder, ureters, renal pelvis, and some other organs. The cells of the urothelium are known as transitional cells because they are able to stretch when the bladder is full of urine and shrink when it is emptied. Urothelial carcinoma is the most common form of bladder cancer in children. Squamous cell and other more aggressive types of bladder cancer are less common in children.  Risk factors for childhood bladder cancer  Symptoms of childhood bladder cancer  Tests to diagnose childhood bladder cancer  Getting a second opinion  Prognosis of  childhood bladder cancer  Types of treatment for childhood bladder cancer  Treatment of childhood bladder cancer  Side effects of treatment  Follow-up testing  Coping and support  Bladder cancer is caused by certain changes to the way bladder cells function, especially how they grow and divide into new cells. To learn more about how cancer develops, see What Is Cancer? The risk of bladder cancer is increased in children who have been treated for cancer with certain anticancer drugs, called alkylating agents, which include cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, busulfan, and temozolomide. Survivors of heritable retinoblastoma also have an increased risk of developing bladder cancer. Not every child with these risk factors will get bladder cancer, and some children who get the disease don’t have any known risk factors. Talk with your child’s doctor if you’re concerned about your child’s risk. The symptoms of bladder cancer can vary from person to person. The most common symptom of bladder cancer is blood in the urine, called hematuria. It’s often slightly rusty to bright red in color. You may see blood in your child’s urine at one point, then not see it again for a while. Sometimes there are very small amounts of blood in the urine that can only be found by having a test done. Other common symptoms of bladder cancer can include frequent urination or feeling the need to urinate without being able to do so pain during urination abdominal or lower back pain It’s important to check with your child’s doctor if your child has any of these symptoms. Keep in mind that urinary tract infections, kidney or bladder stones, or other problems related to the kidney could also be the cause, not cancer. Your child’s doctor will ask you when the symptoms started and how often your child has been having them. They’ll most likely ask for a urine sample as a first step in diagnosing what is causing these symptoms. If your child has symptoms or lab test results that suggest bladder cancer, their doctor will need to find out if these are due to cancer or another condition. They may ask about your child’s personal and family medical history to learn more about your child’s symptoms and possible risk factors for bladder cancer do a physical exam to feel for signs of cancer ask for a sample of urine so it can be checked in the lab for blood, abnormal cells, or infection Depending on your child’s symptoms and medical history and the results of their physical exam and urine lab tests, the doctor may recommend more tests to find out if your child has bladder cancer, and if so, its extent (stage). The results of tests and procedures done to diagnose bladder cancer are used to help make decisions about treatment. The following tests and procedures may be used: CT scan is a procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the pelvis, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. Learn more about Computed Tomography (CT) Scans and Cancer. An ultrasound exam is a procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs, such as the pelvis, and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. Cystoscopy is a procedure in which the doctor looks inside the bladder and urethra (the tube that carries urine out of your body) to check for abnormal areas. A cystoscope  is slowly inserted through the urethra into the bladder to allow the doctor to see inside. A cystoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a tool to remove very small tumors or tissue samples for biopsy. If a cystoscopy is not done at diagnosis, tissue samples are removed and checked for cancer during surgery to remove all or part of the bladder. Some people may want to get a second opinion to confirm their child’s bladder cancer diagnosis and treatment plan. If you choose to seek a second opinion, you will need to get important medical test results and reports from the first doctor to share with the second doctor. The second doctor will review the pathology report, slides, and scans before giving a recommendation. The doctor who gives the second opinion may agree with the first doctor, suggest changes or another approach, or provide more information about your child’s tumor. To learn more about choosing a doctor and getting a second opinion, see Finding Cancer Care. You can contact NCI’s Cancer Information Service via chat, email, or phone (both in English and Spanish) for help finding a doctor or hospital that can provide a second opinion. For questions you might want to ask at your appointments, see Questions to Ask Your Doctor about Cancer. If your child has been diagnosed with bladder cancer, you may have questions about how serious the cancer is and your child’s chances of survival. The likely outcome or course of a disease is called prognosis. The prognosis can be affected by whether the cancer can be removed by surgery.   In children, bladder cancer is usually low grade (not likely to spread) and the prognosis is usually excellent after surgery to remove the tumor. There are different types of treatment for children and adolescents with bladder cancer. You and your child’s cancer care team will work together to decide treatment. Many factors will be considered, such as your child’s overall health and whether the cancer is newly diagnosed or has come back. A pediatric oncologist, a doctor who specializes in treating children with cancer, will oversee treatment. The pediatric oncologist works with other pediatric health professionals who are experts in treating children with cancer and who specialize in certain areas of medicine. This may include the following specialists and others: pediatrician pediatric surgeon pediatric urologist pediatric nurse specialist rehabilitation specialist social worker psychologist fertility specialist Your child’s treatment plan will include information about the cancer, the goals of treatment, treatment options, and the possible side effects. It will be helpful to talk with your child’s cancer care team before treatment begins about what to expect. For help every step of the way, see our downloadable booklet, Children with Cancer: A Guide for Parents. Surgery to remove the cancer and part or all of the bladder is the standard treatment for bladder cancer in children. The type of surgery depends on where the cancer is located and whether it is aggressive. Talk with your child’s doctor about how surgery for bladder cancer can affect urinating, sexual function, and fertility. To learn more, see Fertility Issues in Girls and Women with Cancer and Fertility Issues in Boys and Men with Cancer. During TUR, the doctor removes tissue from the bladder using a resectoscope inserted into the bladder through the urethra. A resectoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light, a lens for viewing, and a tool to remove tissue and burn away any remaining tumor cells. Tissue samples from the area where the tumor was removed are checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. Cystectomy, surgery to remove part or all of the bladder, is rarely used to treat bladder cancer in children. However, it may be needed in children with squamous cell carcinoma or more aggressive carcinomas. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be an option. Use our clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting patients. You can search for trials based on the type of cancer, the age of the patient, and where the trials are being done. Clinical trials supported by other organizations can be found on the ClinicalTrials.gov website. To learn more about clinical trials, see Clinical Trials Information for Patients and Caregivers. Because cancer in children is rare, taking part in a clinical trial should be considered. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Treatment of newly diagnosed bladder cancer in children is usually surgery: transurethral resection (TUR) surgery to remove the bladder (rare) Learn more about these treatments in the Types of treatment section. Sometimes bladder cancer can recur (come back) after treatment. If your child is diagnosed with recurrent bladder cancer, your child's doctor will work with you to  plan treatment. Learn more about Side Effects of Cancer Treatment. Side effects from cancer treatment that begin after treatment and continue for months or years are called late effects. Late effects of cancer treatment may include physical problems changes in mood, feelings, thinking, learning, or memory second cancers (new types of cancer) or other conditions Some late effects may be treated or controlled. It is important to talk with your child's doctors about the possible late effects caused by some treatments. Learn more about Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer may be repeated to see how well the treatment worked. If the bladder cancer recurs (comes back) after treatment, it will usually be within 3 years from diagnosis. Your child will receive tests from time to time after surgery to find out if their condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred. These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. When a child has cancer, every member of the family needs support. Honest and calm conversations build trust as you talk with your child and their siblings. Taking care of yourself during this difficult time is also important. Reach out to your child’s treatment team and to people in your family and community for support. To learn more, see Support for Families When a Child Has Cancer.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Engaging Primary Care Providers in Cancer Survivorship Care - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/leading-progress/stories/erin
txt: With her first R01 grant, a Cancer Moonshot award, Erin is testing whether specialized training in cancer survivorship care for primary care physicians improves outcomes for cancer survivors. On any given weekend, Erin Hahn, Ph.D., M.P.H., might be found tending native plants like sage, salvia, and mallow in her garden, with her husband and three rescue dogs nearby. During the week, this penchant for cultivating spills into her work as a researcher at the Kaiser Permanente Southern California Department of Research and Evaluation to improve care for cancer survivors. Erin studies cancer care delivery with a focus on cancer survivorship, a phase that people enter after receiving a cancer diagnosis and a research area that she believes needs nurturing. “Cancer care is uniquely complex. Cancer survivorship,” she noted, “is a distinct phase of care and needs to be attended to.” There are concerns that the current oncology workforce may be insufficient to care for the rapidly growing population of survivors, with more than 18 million cancer survivors living in the United States today. This population is only expected to grow as innovations in treatment allow cancer patients to live longer past diagnosis. Erin points to cancer surveillance and primary prevention procedures—such as mammograms, colonoscopies, vaccines, lipid profile testing, and cardiovascular risk management—as underused tools in the care of cancer survivors. In 2019, Erin applied for her first NCI R01 grant and received it in 2020. The R01 grant is considered the “gold standard” for independent investigators working to answer specific research questions. Erin’s grant was funded through the Cancer Moonshot℠ on the topic of optimizing and managing cancer survivor care. “When I saw that topic, it was right up my alley,” she said. “I knew I had to apply.” Through her grant, she is studying novel models of care for cancer survivors in a large health system. Health system–based research provides evidence that, when applied, can make care more affordable, effective, equitable, accessible, patient-centered, and safer. Erin hopes her research will answer the question: Will primary care cancer survivorship clinics, staffed by primary care physicians trained in cancer survivorship care (such as cancer surveillance and managing late effects of treatment), help optimize care for cancer survivors? For the study, Erin is leveraging the relationship that the Department of Research and Evaluation in Southern California has with the Kaiser Permanente health system. In Southern California, Kaiser Permanente provides care to 7 million members. This gives Erin unique access to several thousand early-stage breast and colorectal cancer survivors across the Kaiser Permanente Southern California system. Having access to such a large group of patients is a boon for Erin’s research, and ultimately, she hopes to learn if the primary care survivorship clinics are effective and can be scaled up nationally across large health systems like Kaiser Permanente, which has about 12.7 million members in the United States. Prior to receiving the R01, Erin focused on several areas of implementation science that helped coalesce her approach to research on cancer survivorship care in a large health care system. While working on her master of public health degree, she was strongly influenced by a mentor who taught her that research influences policy, and that health care research can be an effective way to get evidence into practice. Erin went on to receive an NCI predoctoral (R25) award, followed by a Kaiser Permanente postdoctoral fellowship in delivery system science with a focus on cancer care. NCI highlights five areas of scientific opportunity for fiscal year 2025. Shortly after receiving her first R01, Erin applied for and received two more NCI awards. As with her first grant, she brings her health systems perspective to these projects. For her second NCI award, Erin is collaborating with four other principal investigators on a program project grant (P01) surveying the care given to adolescent and young adult cancer survivors with the intent to learn about their care experience and where interventions to improve care delivery are needed. Her third NCI award is an R01 grant on which she is a co-principal investigator. This research compares several strategies across 60 Kaiser Permanente pediatric practices to help increase uptake of the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine, which can prevent cervical and several other HPV-related cancers, among youths ages 9 to 12. Erin’s efforts to improve health care for cancer survivors and advance cancer prevention are central to NCI’s goal of improving the experience of people living with and after cancer and the institute’s mission to advance scientific knowledge to help all people live longer, healthier lives. “Health system–based research is critical,” Erin said. “Figuring out how to do research within such systems in a way that positively affects our patients’ lives is really important. The kind of work I do, the kind of strategies I use, the tools I develop,” she reflected, “they are very purposefully designed for dissemination. For cancer care, there are a lot of points where we can intervene and improve.”
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Dostarlimab-gxly - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/dostarlimab-gxly
txt: Dostarlimab-gxly is a type of drug called an immune checkpoint inhibitor (a type of immunotherapy). It is a monoclonal antibody that binds to the protein PD-1 on the surface of immune cells called T cells. It works by keeping cancer cells from suppressing the immune system. This allows the immune system to attack and kill the cancer cells. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Dostarlimab-gxly
         is approved to treat adults with:  Endometrial cancer that has spread outside the uterus or come back. It is used:With carboplatin and paclitaxel and then alone in patients whose cancer is  mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) or microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H).Alone in patients whose cancer is dMMR, cannot be treated with surgery or radiation therapy, and got worse during or after treatment with platinum chemotherapy.  Solid tumors that are dMMR, have spread or come back,  and got worse during or after other treatment and  cannot be treated with other therapies.¹ With carboplatin and paclitaxel and then alone in patients whose cancer is  mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) or microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H). Alone in patients whose cancer is dMMR, cannot be treated with surgery or radiation therapy, and got worse during or after treatment with platinum chemotherapy. ¹This use is approved under FDA’s Accelerated Approval Program. As a condition of approval, confirmatory trial(s) must show that dostarlimab-gxly provides a clinical benefit in these patients. Dostarlimab-gxly
         is also being studied in the treatment of other types of
         cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Dostarlimab-gxly - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. A Better Biomarker for Cancer Immunotherapy? Immunotherapy’s Role in Treating Endometrial Cancer Expected to Grow Immunotherapy and… Nothing Else? Studies Test Potential Paradigm Shift in Cancer Treatment Targeted Cancer Therapies Cancer Immunotherapies Don’t Work for Everyone: HLA Gene May Explain Why Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors Monoclonal Antibodies Find Clinical Trials for Dostarlimab-gxly - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Fostamatinib Disodium - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/fostamatinibdisodium
txt: This page contains brief information about fostamatinib disodium
         and a collection of links to more information about the use of 
         this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Fostamatinib disodium
         is approved to treat:  Thrombocytopenia (low platelet levels). It is used in adults with chronic immune thrombocytopenia (ITP). ITP is a condition in which platelets are destroyed by the immune system. Fostamatinib disodium is used in certain patients with ITP who have not gotten better with other treatment.  Fostamatinib disodium is also being studied in the treatment of other conditions and types of
         cancer. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Fostamatinib Disodium - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Find Clinical Trials for Fostamatinib Disodium - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Alliance of Glycobiologists for Cancer Research - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/dcb/research-programs/alliance-glycobiologists
txt: Representative image for the Alliance of Glycobiologists for Cancer Research Glycans are sugars that are linked together, which often form complex structures and are bound to proteins and lipids. These molecules are expressed on the surfaces of cells and mediate many biological processes. Recent evidence suggests that cancers display alterations in glycan structures, and glycan-based biomarkers represent a largely untapped area relevant to cancer detection and diagnosis. This Alliance is determining the biological mechanisms that alter glycosylation to promote cancer and developing glycan-based markers that can be used for the early detection of cancer. The U01 research projects of the Alliance were funded by the NCI Division of Cancer Biology and NCI Division of Cancer Prevention through PAR-17-206 and PAR-17-207. Additional information can be found on the Alliance’s website.  Biological Tumor Glycomics Laboratories  Translational Tumor Glycomics Laboratories  Partnering Groups with the Alliance  DCB Contact for the Alliance  Funded Projects  Biological Tumor Glycomics Laboratories Translational Tumor Glycomics Laboratories Partnering Groups with the Alliance DCB Contact for the Alliance Funded Projects Biological Tumor Glycomics Laboratories The five Biological Tumor Glycomics Laboratories of the Alliance are advancing the understanding of the role of altered glycosylation and other modifications in carbohydrate structure in cancer. Researchers of the laboratories are investigating the biology of modifications in carbohydrate structure that influence cellular transformation, cancer progression, and metastasis. Ultimately, the basic findings and glycobiological data aim to be the translated into clinical applications. Translational Tumor Glycomics Laboratories The five Translational Tumor Glycomics Laboratories of the Alliance are discovering how structural changes in carbohydrates promote cancer progression and identifying glycan-based abnormalities that can be used as biomarkers for early cancer detection. The most promising biomarker candidates will ultimately be tested in clinical validation studies. Partnering Groups with the Alliance The Common Fund Glycoscience Program (CFG) partners with the Alliance of Glycobiologists for Cancer Research. It offers many unique core resources that are specific to glycomics and CFG labs have developed and share numerous tools for glycoscience studies. NCI's Early Detection Research Network (EDRN) promotes the clinical validation of cancer biomarkers for early detection and cancer risk. This consortium is helping labs of the Alliance validate glycan-based cancer biomarkers. DCB Contact for the Alliance For additional information about the Alliance of Glycobiologists for Cancer Research, please contact Dr. Natalia Mercer. Funded Projects
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: FAQs - Serological Sciences Network RFAs - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/key-initiatives/covid-19/serological-sciences-network/faqs
txt:  What is the difference between a U01 and a U54?  Are the direct cost limits per year or across the entire project period?  Are technology development projects related to serological sciences appropriate for these RFAs?  Are clinical trials appropriate for these RFAs?  How many institutes need to be included on the team for a U01 or U54 application?  Are private companies allowed to apply?  Are multiple applications from the same institution allowed?  Can a research project from a U54 application also be submitted as a U01?  What are the page limits for the application?  Is the Resource Sharing Plan included in the page limits?  What will be the relationship between the U54 Centers of Excellence and the Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNL) Serology Lab?  Is there a minimum level of effort required for the investigators?  What is the difference between a U01 and a U54? Are the direct cost limits per year or across the entire project period? Are technology development projects related to serological sciences appropriate for these RFAs? Are clinical trials appropriate for these RFAs? How many institutes need to be included on the team for a U01 or U54 application? Are private companies allowed to apply? Are multiple applications from the same institution allowed? Can a research project from a U54 application also be submitted as a U01? What are the page limits for the application? Is the Resource Sharing Plan included in the page limits? What will be the relationship between the U54 Centers of Excellence and the Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNL) Serology Lab? Is there a minimum level of effort required for the investigators? What is the difference between a U01 and a U54? A U01 is a single discrete research project with direct costs of up to $500,000 per year. A U54 consists of two to three research projects, an administrative core, and up to two optional shared resource cores, with total direct costs of up to $1.5 million per year. Both mechanisms will be required to have a Resource Sharing Plan, abide by Cooperative Agreement terms and conditions, set aside 10% of their total direct costs for post-award collaborative activities, and participate in the SeroNet Steering Committee. They will also both be reviewed in a Special Emphasis Panel convened by NCI. Are the direct cost limits per year or across the entire project period? The U54 direct cost limit ($1.5 million) and U01 direct cost limit ($500,000) are per year. Are technology development projects related to serological sciences appropriate for these RFAs? This research is intended to inform assay development. Technology development is in scope for these RFAs. Groups that are particularly interested in developing novel assays and building testing capacity are encouraged to look at the Request for Proposals for the Capacity Building Centers (CBCs). The CBCs are expected to participate in serosurveillance research and will have opportunities to participate in other serological sciences research. Are clinical trials appropriate for these RFAs? Clinical trials related to treatment interventions are not appropriate. Clinical trial components for these RFAs are intended to support behavioral and healthcare delivery research. How many institutes need to be included on the team for a U01 or U54 application? The applicant team can be from the same institution; there is no minimum. Are private companies allowed to apply? Yes, private companies can apply for the U54 or U01 and must comply with the resource sharing requirements. Are multiple applications from the same institution allowed? Yes, but they must be scientifically distinct. Can a research project from a U54 application also be submitted as a U01? No, as stated in the RFA: "The NIH will not accept duplicate or highly overlapping applications under review at the same time." What are the page limits for the application? For the U01, the Research Strategy is limited to 6 pages. For the U54, the Overall component is limited to 12 pages; the Administrative Core is 3 pages; the Shared Resource Cores (optional, up to 2) are 3 pages per core; the Research Projects (2–3) are 6 pages per project. The Specific Aims page is not included in the page limits for the Research Strategy of each component. Is the Resource Sharing Plan included in the page limits? No, the Resource Sharing Plan does not count toward the Research Strategy page limit. Use the PHS 398 Research Plan form. What will be the relationship between the U54 Centers of Excellence and the Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNL) Serology Lab? Collaboration is encouraged across the Network. The FNL Serology Lab will develop qualified assay standards, generate novel reagents, and establish serum panels and will share assays, reagents, and standards with the other components of SeroNet. The FNL Serology Lab is not intended to be used as an experimental or testing core for the research projects. Is there a minimum level of effort required for the investigators? For U01s, as described in NOT-CA-20-047, a minimum of 1.8 calendar months/year is required from a single principal investigator (PI) and a minimum of 1.2 calendar months/year is required for each PI on a multi-PI application. Although a minimum level of effort is not provided for U54 investigators, applicants are encouraged to consider the guidance for P01s provided in NOT-CA-20-047.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Gregory Reaman - CCDI Scientific Director - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/childhood/childhood-cancer-data-initiative/stories/gregory
txt: CCDI Scientific Director Dr. Gregory Reaman sees enormous opportunities in being able to connect and share childhood cancer data. CCDI Scientific Director at NCI When Dr. Gregory Reaman (he/him) was a child, nobody talked about what happened to a neighborhood boy who became sick, went to the hospital, and never came home. It was later that Greg found out that his neighbor had passed away from leukemia. This early experience and other formative moments throughout medical school and residency inspired Greg to pursue a career in pediatrics—especially pediatric oncology—and invest in translational research to improve outcomes for children with cancer. He’s since held leadership positions in childhood cancer research, including founding chair of the Children’s Oncology Group, associate director for pediatric oncology at the US Food and Drug Administration, and now, CCDI scientific director. “The power of childhood cancer data speaks for itself,” he said, “and being able to aggregate, share, and broadly use these data outside of individual projects has enormous opportunities.” His hope for CCDI is that it models what’s achievable in cancer research, even outside of the pediatric population.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Ravulizumab-cwvz - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/ravulizumab-cwvz
txt: This page contains brief information about ravulizumab-cwvz
         and a collection of links to more information about the use of 
         this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials. FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed. Ravulizumab-cwvz
         is approved to treat:  Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (a blood clotting disorder) in adults and children aged 1 month and older. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) in adults.  Ravulizumab-cwvz
         is also being studied in the treatment of other conditions. Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary - Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug. MedlinePlus Information on Ravulizumab-cwvz - A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following: warnings about this drug, what this drug is used for and how it is used, what you should tell your doctor before using this drug, what you should know about this drug before using it, other drugs that may interact with this drug, and possible side effects. Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied. Find Clinical Trials for Ravulizumab-cwvz - Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients. Important: The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.
--------------------------------------------------
ttle: Donate Your Data and Specimens for Cancer Research - NCI
@: https://www.cancer.gov/research/participate/articles/donate-medical-data-and-samples
txt: Cancer researchers can find valuable information from medical data such as electronic health records, if you choose to donate.  Impact of medical data and samples  How to donate data or samples  Donating data or samples is a choice  Read more about sample donation  Impact of medical data and samples How to donate data or samples Donating data or samples is a choice Read more about sample donation Donating your medical data and samples is just one of many ways to participate in cancer research. Medical data can include health records or any documentation you’ve provided to your doctors about your health that you are open to sharing. Samples, also called biospecimens, might include tumor tissue, blood, and urine. Sample and data donations are a critical resource for cancer research because they provide clues to what is going on in the body. Studying samples and data can improve how we prevent, diagnose, treat, and care for those with cancer. With samples and data from as many diverse groups of people as possible, researchers can help ensure that everyone benefits from medical advances. Impact of medical data and samples Data and sample donations are important to research progress. They collected my cells from the tumor they extracted. If there is some way that my body could be used to help further research and treatments for diseases, I thought that was an important thing to give that. Sue Scott, Cancer Research Participant, Cancer Survivor For example, health information data provided by thousands of study participants in farming communities in Iowa and South Carolina over several decades has led to a better understanding of farming-related exposures that might put someone at risk for cancer. In another case, donated tissue, oral, and fecal samples are helping other researchers study the potential connections between our microbiomes and cancer. And privacy-protected data from molecular testing of tumor samples from young people with cancer are being shared with the research community to aid in discovering new and better childhood cancer treatments. How to donate data or samples Here are some ways you can donate data and samples: Take part in a clinical trial or observational study. Your health experiences during your participation and results from analyzing your samples are types of data you can donate.  Talk with your medical team about donation prior to undergoing a scheduled biopsy, surgery, or other medical procedure that involve samples or data.  Give consent to your hospital or medical institution to use your records for further research.  There are also several NCI-supported studies collecting data or sample donations: My Pediatric and Adult Rare Tumor network  The Cancer Moonshot Biobank  Childhood Cancer Data Initiative Molecular Characterization Initiative  Observational Cancer Research Studies  If you think you might be eligible, contact these study teams or ask your doctor to contact them. Donating data or samples is a choice "The ultimate goal is to leverage all this information and data in order to make good on the promise of precision medicine." — Corrie Painter, researcher and cancer survivor It is always your choice to donate your medical data or samples, and you can change your mind even after you’ve donated. You can always ask your study team or doctor to remove or destroy your donated data and remaining samples. Your study team will discuss options with you, as well as any next steps. If you decide to donate, remember that rules and ethical guidelines are in place to protect you. These include: Institutional Review Boards, who approve plans for research studies and ensure that participants’ rights and safety are protected.  Informed consent, which is a process that helps you understand what the study entails before you agree to take part.  The HIPAA privacy rule, which protects your personal health information.  Your informed consent form should outline what will be done to protect your privacy and secure your data. Donating Your Tissue for Research Tissue donation is a vital part of cancer research, and can be meaningful to patients and researchers. Watch this video to learn more about tissue donation from the perspective of two cancer survivors along with a physician-researcher from the National Cancer Institute. Read more about sample donation Providing Your Tissue for Research: What You Need to Know (PDF)  How Can You Help Medical Research (PDF)  NCI’s Biorepositories & Biospecimen Research Branch Patient Corner  Using patient data and samples to advance cancer research supports the National Cancer Plan goals of maximizing data utility and engaging every person. Learn more about the goals >
--------------------------------------------------
